1
2
                          Global War 1936
                                                           v4.3

                                            Table of Contents




Acknowledgements ....................................................................................................4
Introduction .................................................................................................................4
Chapter 0 - Terminology .............................................................................................5
Chapter 1 - The Map .................................................................................................10
Chapter 2 - Setting Up ..............................................................................................18
Chapter 3 - Victory ....................................................................................................20
Chapter 4 - National Relations ..................................................................................26
Chapter 5 - War and Peace ......................................................................................35
Chapter 6 - Pacts and Truces ...................................................................................40
Chapter 7 - Order of Play ..........................................................................................43
Chapter 8 - Production Phase ..................................................................................45
Chapter 9 - Combat Movement Phase .....................................................................54
Chapter 10 - Combat Phase .....................................................................................61
Chapter 11 - Non-combat Movement Phase ...........................................................74
Chapter 12 - Place Units Phase ................................................................................79
Chapter 13 - Units and Facilities ..............................................................................83
Chapter 14 - Historical Events ................................................................................100
Chapter 15 - National Special Abilities ...................................................................102
Chapter 16 - Designer Notes ..................................................................................108




                                                                                                                                  3
                              Acknowledgements

Historical Board Gaming would like to thank the people who worked on this most recent
edition of Global War 1936:

Lead designer Morten Munck, co-designer Mattias Thomsen, member of the design/play-
testing team: Steven Kuntz, Søren Finderup and editor Peter Neifert (GW ’36 Enthusiast).

Many others have also contributed. Historical Board Gaming is grateful for its thriving
community, and would like to thank everyone who has sent ideas, suggestions and provided
feedback to help improve the game.

Version 4 stands on the shoulders of the earlier versions. As such, Historical Board Gaming
would also like to acknowledge everyone who participated in developing the earlier versions.


                                                                Copyright © Historical Board Gaming




                                     Introduction

After more than 1000 hours of development over the last 4 years, Historical Board Gaming is
proud to present Global War 1936 version 4.

Listing the changes is an impossible task. Every component in the game and every sentence
in the rules has been scrutinized. In many ways, version 4 is a totally new game compared to
version 3.

We have done a lot of streamlining to make the game faster to play, and easier for new players
to pick up. This includes removing things that did not work well or were unnecessarily
complicated.

A tremendous amount has been added to the game: an all-new map, revised diplomacy, more
balanced units, and enhanced technologies. Everything is now much more integrated. One of
the biggest new additions are the “in port” rules, which will transform the game in many ways.

In any 3-alliance system, the rules open up possibilities to gaming the system. Although a lot
has been done to reduce/eliminate this in version 4, Global War has been designed to be
played like gentlemen. As such, it is our hope that players aspire to this, and “play the game”,
instead of “playing the rules”. The former is a lot more fun!




                                                                                               4
                                     Chapter 0 - Terminology
     0.1 Terminology:
     Global War rules use many speci c terms. For ease of use, where a term has a speci c
     de nition in the game it is Capitalized. For example, the terms Control, Possession and
     Alliance are Capitalized to di erentiate them from their more common usage.


     0.2 Glossary:
     Alliance: Any of three main coalitions: Axis, Allies or Comintern. Minor Powers may join these
     Alliances during the game. In order to avoid confusion, we use the term “members of your
     Alliance” instead of “allies” to avoid confusion with the Alliance called the “Allies” (refer to 4.3).

     Aligned: Two or more nations are Aligned when they meet certain conditions. Major Powers
     that are members of the same Alliance will Align with each other when they are at war with the
     same Major Power. Minor Powers Align with Major Powers when certain Alignment conditions
     are met (refer to 4.6).

     Annexation: Special kind of combat move by a Major Power that takes place with no combat
     and no Declaration of War against a Minor Power. It is allowed only under certain conditions:
     the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact; German Annexations of Bohemia, Slovakia and Austria; and
     Italian Annexation of Albania (refer to 5.6).

     Attacker/Defender: The Attacker is the player who is currently taking a Player Turn. The
     Defender is any other player that is being attacked. Where the rules use the words “attack” or
     “defend” they also refer to this dynamic. Thus, if a rule states that a unit gets +1 attack, it only
     gets that bonus when it is the Attacker and not when it is the Defender.

     British Commonwealth: Great Britain, Far East Command (FEC), Australian and New Zealand
     Army Corps (ANZAC) and all land zones on the map marked with a British, Canadian,
     Egyptian, South African Union, FEC, Australian or New Zealand roundel are considered part of
     the British Commonwealth. Canada, Egypt and the South African Union are treated as part of
     Great Britain. Australia and New Zealand are treated as part of ANZAC. They all share the
     same Player Turn (refer to their national reference sheets for more information).

     Calendar Turn: When the rules specify that it takes a Calendar Turn, it means that all nations
     have gone through their turn sequence (refer to 7.1).

     Capital: Required to collect income. (Note that ANZAC, CCP, FEC and KMT are exceptions,
     refer to their National Reference Sheet). A Capital may be captured (refer to 10.10.2) and some
     nations may relocate it (refer to 10.10.3).

     Capital Ship: Fleet Carriers, Heavy Fleet Carriers, Battleships and Heavy Battleships are
     Capital Ships. These ships take multiple hits to destroy. Can only be built at Major Shipyards.

     Carrier: Surface Ships de ned by their ability to carry Fighters/Tactical Bombers.

     China: When the rules refer to China (without a speci c reference), they refer to all KMT, CCP
     and warlord Originally possessed land zones.

     Control: A level of decision-making power a Major Power has over a Minor Power. This
     typically includes moving that nation’s units, rolling for that nation’s units in battle, choosing
     casualties in combat, and making recruitment rolls (refer to 4.5).
     It is important to understand the di erence between “Aligns” and “Controls”.

     D6/D12: Six-sided dice are used in convoy raiding, part of Soviet income rolls and strategic
     bombing. Twelve-sided dice are the standard dice used otherwise.


                                                                                                          5
fi




                 fi




                      ff




                           fi




                                ff




                                               fi




                                                                                  fi
     Declaration of War (DoW): Declaring war is “initiating” war. Many nations have certain
     requirements to meet before they can declare war and limitations when, how and on whom
     they can declare war (refer to 5.1).

     Enemy: Nations (and all their units, facilities and land zones) are Enemies when they are at war
     with each other (e.g. Germany and France are not “Enemies” until they are at war).

     Friendly: A Nation (and all its units, facilities and land zones) is Friendly if (a) it Possesses them
     or (b) it is Aligned with them. (For example, London is not a Friendly land zone for USA until
     USA and British Commonwealth are Aligned.)

     Full Production: The total IPP value of a nation’s Originally possessed land zones. For USSR,
     the current Full Production income is the total IPP value of all currently possessed, Originally
     possessed land zones.

     Home Country: Each nation has a group of land zones that comprise its Home Country. Home
     Country is used for various things like building certain facilities, Supply Paths, receiving Lend-
     lease, etc.
                                 Home Country Land Zones
     Germany                     Berlin, Western Germany, Eastern Germany and Bavaria.
     Japan                       Tokyo, Honshu, Hokkaido and Kyushu.
     Italy                       Rome, Northern Italy, Lazio and Southern Italy.
     USSR                        All Originally possessed land zones with a Soviet roundel
                                 All land zones Originally with a Chinese warlord, KMT, CCP,
     CCP / KMT                   Manchukuo or Mongolian roundel as well as Formosa and Hong
                                 Kong.
                                 London, Northern England, Southern England, Scotland and
     Great Britain               Northern Ireland.
                                 Punjab, Maharashtra, Delhi, Benares, Calcutta and Southern
     FEC                         India.
     ANZAC                       All land zones in Australia and New Zealand.
                                 Paris, Picardy, Alsace-Lorraine, Southern France, Aquitaine and
     France                      Normandy.
     Free France                 Does not have a Home Country.
     Vichy                       Corsica and Southern France.
                                 Contiguous United States (all USA Originally possessed land
     USA                         zones adjoining Washington, D.C.).

     Non-listed nations’ Home Country are all Originally possessed land zones except o shore
     territories.

     Example: Suriname, Netherlands Antilles and Netherlands East Indies are o shore land zones
     and not part of Netherlands’ Home Country.

     Industrial Production Points (IPP): The basic unit of currency in the game.

     In uencing Zone: A land zone controlled/possessed by the nation which is attempting an
     in uence roll on an adjacent land zone. In order to qualify, the land zone must have contained
     a unit since the beginning of the Player Turn. Note that impassable borders do not count for
     adjacency.


                                                                                                          6
fl




fl




                                                                       ff




                                                                                ff
Japan: All land zones on the map marked with a Japanese or Manchukuo roundel.

Lend-lease: A system by which Major Powers may produce units for other nations without
necessarily being at war themselves (refer to 8.7). Lend-lease is delivered via a Supply Path
(refer to 12.4).

Manchukuo: Rehe, Northern-, Western- & Eastern Manchuria.

Maritime Air Patrol (MAP): Special kind of combat move for aircraft in a sea zone (refer to
9.3.1).

Nations: Nations are grouped into Major Powers and Minor Powers (refer to 4.1 and 4.2).

Naval Facility: Ports, dockyards and shipyards.

Naval Supply: Sea zones in a Supply Path are in Naval Supply. Determined when moving
Surface Ships (excluding Battlecruisers designated as a raider) in the Combat Movement or
Non-combat Movement phases. Applicable for Major Powers.

Originally: Since the start of the game. The nation with its roundel printed in the land zone on
the map.

Example: Szechwan is Originally KMT. Sikang is not.

Player Turn: When the rules specify that it takes a Player Turn, it means that it takes a whole
“Production - Combat Movement - Combat - Non-combat Movement - Place Units” turn
sequence (refer to 7.3).

Possession/Ownership: Possession means that a nation owns a land zone – either either via
Alignment (refer to 4.6), Annexation (refer to 5.6), capture (refer to 10.10), liberation (refer to
10.10.1), or starting the game with it. A nation can never Possess a sea zone.

Spain: All land zones on the map marked with a Spanish Nationalists or Spanish Republicans
roundel.

Spanish Nationalists/Republicans: Factions in the Spanish Civil War. Di erent from
“Nationalist/Republican Spain”, which is a neutral Minor Power created after the resolution of
the Spanish Civil War.

Strategic Naval Movement: Special kind of movement available to naval transports (refer to
11.4.2).

Strategic Rail Movement: Movement of land, air or rocket units via railroads (refer to 11.2).

Submerge: Defending submarines Submerge after the rst combat round. Once a defending
submarine is submerged, it has withdrawn from combat and can no longer be taken as a
casualty. Submerging lasts for the rest of the Attacking Player’s Turn. Attacking submarines
never Submerge.

Surface Ship: Any naval unit that is not a submarine.

Supply Path: A virtual path of land and/or sea zones traced across the map from your Home
Country for various purposes (refer to 1.11). Can be blockaded (refer to 9.4.6) and interdicted
(refer to 12.5).




                                                                                                      7
                                            fi




                                                             ff
     Target Selection: The player rolling a hit within a certain range chooses the casualty. Often
     limited to a particular class (i.e. a Tank Destroyer selects an Enemy vehicle-class unit on rolling
     “1-3”).

     Warship: Any naval unit that is not a naval transport.

     Wartime Bonus Income: Nations are eligible to get Wartime Bonus Income once at war with a
     Major Power. Zones and convoy lines that provide a Wartime Bonus Income are depicted with
     rectangular ags on the map. Use the IPP tracker to keep track of each nation’s Wartime
     Bonus Income.

     Wartime Income: Some nations have to reach a certain level of income to be able to declare
     war. This is called Wartime Income (refer to 5.1).


     0.3 Zone Sharing:
     There are times that units of di erent nationalities share land or sea zones (other than being in
     combat).

     Sharing Land Zones:
     Nations may not share land zones until they are Aligned, (exception: if CCP and KMT have
     signed the Chinese Truce (refer to 6.6)).

     Example: British and French units cannot both be in Picardy until they are at war with the same
     Major Power even though they are from the same Alliance.

     If your units are present in an Aligned land zone being attacked by a nation not a war with you,
     your units do not participate in the combat, unless you or the Attacker declare war (if
     possible). If the Attacker succeeds in conquering the land zone, any non-participating units are
     moved to the nearest Friendly-possessed land zone, regardless of distance.

     Sharing Sea Zones:
     Nations that are not at war with each other may freely share sea zones and do not a ect each
     other. There are instances when units that are at war might share a sea zone:

     • When naval units of nations that were not at war now come to be at war.
     • When submarines Submerge.
     • When aircraft on Maritime Air Patrol decline combat (refer to 9.3.1).
     • When Battlecruisers slip away (refer to 9.4.4).
     • When Surface Warships are designated as escorts and ignored by Enemy units (refer to
       9.4.5).

     In these cases, units do not participate in combat until one power makes a new combat move
     during the Combat Movement Phase against the other units in that zone. Units may freely
     move out of the zone without triggering an attack. (Exception: Strategic Naval Movement
     cannot depart from an Enemy-occupied sea zone, refer to 11.4.2). If the Attacking player
     moves into a sea zone which contains Enemy units and neutral units, and then the neutral
     power comes to be at war with the Attacking player, then the Defending players defend
     together (refer to next section, “Defense”).

     Example: USSR and Germans are not at war and their ships are in the same sea zone. Then
     Germany declares war on USSR. Germany could attack the Soviet ships (during Germany’s
     Combat Movement Phase), move out of the zone, or stay in the same zone and do nothing.

     Defense:
     When two or more members of the same Alliance have units in a zone that is being Attacked,
     Defending players jointly decide which units su er casualties. If players cannot agree on which
     casualty to take, either player may request to resolve the issue with a die roll where highest

                                                                                                      8
fl




                      ff




                                        ff




                                                                              ff
          roller makes the choice (ties are re-rolled). When members of di erent Alliances (e.g.
          Comintern and Allies) share a sea zone and are attacked by a power they are both at war with,
          they would also defend together. However, members of a di erent Alliance cannot join in a
          naval battle as a result of a Declaration of War in the Combat Phase.

          Attack:
          Although members of the same Alliance defend together when attacked by a nation they are
          both at war with, nations that do not share a Player Turn cannot participate in an Attack
          together. This includes in a sea zone, even if that sea zone contains units from other members
          of his Alliance. Only the Attacking player’s units may participate in and be taken as casualties
          during attacks.

          Example: If a German eet enters a sea zone with a USA eet and an Italian Submarine, the
          Italian Submarine could not be selected as a casualty during combat because it is not Italy’s
          Player Turn and the Submarine is not attacking. This would be di erent if USA was the Attacker
          as the German and Italian units could defend together (but only if both were at war with USA).



          0.4 Movement & Range:
          When calculating movement (when moving units) or range (when ring Strategic Rockets or
          calculating Maritime Air Patrol ranges), crossing each land or sea zone border counts as one
          point of movement or range. Movement is always across a border. Diagonal movement is not
          allowed across a vertex. Movement within a zone (such as moving from a Carrier into the
          same sea zone) does not count against a unit’s movement.



          0.5 Bonuses & Die Roll Modi ers:
          Bonuses and die roll modi ers are cumulative except as follows:

          (a) A player may only claim the highest positive attack or defense bonus available to each unit
              each round. (Exception: Modi ers from Germany’s “Operation Barbarossa” (refer to 15.1)
              and Japan’s “Dug in Defense” (refer to 15.4).)

          Example: An Infantry defending in a city with a forti cation would claim defense +2 on the rst
          round of combat due to the forti cation, and defense +1 due to the city on all subsequent
          rounds.

          (b) A player is only subject to the highest negative attack or defense penalty to each unit each
              round. (Exception: Modi ers from Germany’s “Operation Barbarossa” (refer to 15.1) and
              Japan’s “Surprise Attack” (refer to 15.4).)

          Example: A mountain and river in a zone would both subject an attacking armor to a -1 attack,
          but the Attacker would only su er -1 (not a combined -2). For other examples of Multiple
          Terrains, refer to 1.7.8.
          Example: Germany declares war on USSR with an “Operation Barbarossa”. Germany manages
          to surround Kiev. All defending Soviet units would su er a combined -2 defense (-1 for being
          surrounded and -1 for “Operation Barbarossa”).

          (c) Permanent changes to a unit’s statistics are not modi ers. Thus, an Airborne Infantry unit
              that becomes Elite after developing Airborne Doctrine technology would still be subject to
              terrain modi ers.

          (d) Negative modi ers never reduce an attack or defense value to less than one. Modi ers do
              not a ect units without an attack value or defense value (listed N/A for attack/defense).

          (e) Movement bonuses conferred by facilities are not cumulative.

                                                                                                           9
ff




     fi




           fi




                   fl




                        fi




                             fi




                                  fi




                                       ff




                                            fi




                                                 fi




                                                      fi




                                                           ff




                                                                fi




                                                                     fl




                                                                          ff




                                                                               ff




                                                                                    ff




                                                                                         fi




                                                                                              fi




                                                                                                   fi
                                              Chapter 1 - The Map
               1.1 Land Zones:
               All land zones have a name printed on them. If a land zone does not have a name, it is part of
               an adjacent zone or island chain and not a separate zone.


               1.2 Sea Zones:
               All sea zones have a number. The letter designates which ocean the zone is in:

               Atlantic Ocean:          A##
               Mediterranean:           M##
               Indian Ocean:            I##
               Paci c:                  P##

               A sea zone cannot be possessed.


               1.3 Colors & Roundels:
               All nations on the map are identi ed by a color and a roundel.


               1.4 Facilities:
               Land zones may have various structures in them referred to henceforth as “facilities”. Many
               facilities are shown on the map. Additional facilities can be built.

               Location within a zone matters for the purpose of blockading (refer to 9.4.6), scrambling (refer
               to 10.4) and narrow crossings (refer to 1.9).


               1.5 Convoy Lines:
               Convoy lines are printed on the map with dark blue dotted lines. These lines have a roundel
               that show whose line it is and usually a blue number showing the maximum potential IPP loss
               value.

               A convoy line can start and end in a land or sea zone. Convoy lines that end in sea
               zones are marked with an arc. If it starts or ends in a land zone, it will close if one
               or both of these ends is possessed by an Enemy. A closed convoy line cannot be
               raided.                                                                                 Ends in sea zone

                                                                                           Narrow      Broad
               1.6 Railroads:
               Railroads are drawn on the map in checkered lines. Narrow (normal)
               gauge railroads are depicted with a white checkered lines and broad
               gauge with a yellow checkered line.


               1.7 Terrain:
               There are several terrain types in the game. If the majority of a roundel in a land zone is
               located in a terrain type, the entire land zone is subject to terrain rules.

               Examples: Sydney is mountains. Rome is mountains. Belgium is normal terrain.



                                                                                                                10
 ​




      ​




          fi




                                   fi
                     The land zone the unit is starting in does not cause terrain e ects. Assume it begins directly
                     on the border. If the roundel of the entered land zone is not located in terrain, but you need to
                     cross terrain to reach the roundel, you are subject to “border terrain” rules. Movement rules for
                     that terrain are in e ect, but combat rules for that terrain last only for the rst combat round for
                     both attacker and defender. Determine a crossing by tracing the shortest land path from the
                     originating land zone roundel or sea zone number to the entered land zone roundel that only
                     passes through the two zones, not counting the originating land zone terrain.

                     Example: USSR is attacking Western Ukraine with a T-34 from Eastern Ukraine. USSR
                     Possesses Kiev. If the T-34 moves through Kiev into Western Ukraine, this will consume two
                     movement points, but the T-34 will not face the river penalty. If the T-34 moves directly from
                     Eastern Ukraine to Western Ukraine, the shortest path goes north of Kiev. Starting on the
                     border of Eastern and Western Ukraine, the T-34 will cross a river as it moves towards the
                     roundel of Western Ukraine and thus su ers the river penalty on the rst round of combat.

                                          Example: Germany attacks Belgium, and following a successful invasion,
                                          they are able to blitz with eligible units into Picardy, since the mountain
                                          border is on the Belgian side. However, if the situation was reversed,
                                          French units attacking into Germany-possessed Belgium would su er -1
                                          attack in the rst round, and would not be allowed to blitz further, since
                                          they are subject to mountain border terrain.

                                          Example: A German Naval Transport in sea zone M11 drops o 1 Infantry
                     and 1 Marine to perform an amphibious assault in Donets-Kuban. To determine the terrain, a
                     line is traced from "M11" on the map to the roundel for Donets-Kuban. As this line is traced, it
                     reaches the coast of Transcaucasia, but cannot enter this land zone. The shortest path to reach
                     Donets-Kuban is to travel northwest along the coast of Transcaucasia until reaching North
                     Caucasia. Again, the path cannot enter North Caucasia and the shortest path is to continue
                     traveling northwest along the coast until reaching the coast of Donets-Kuban, where the terrain
                     is a mountain border.

                     If a land unit has more than one movement (e.g. vehicles and self-propelled artillery), conduct
                     each movement separately against the terrain (i.e. as long as movement was not ended due to
                     terrain in the rst movement, assume the unit also begins directly on the border for its second
                     movement).

                     Example: A Japanese Self-propelled Artillery is moving from Northern Manchuria to Kerulen. It
                     chooses to move through Japanese-possessed Western Manchuria. Starting on the border on
                     a straight line from the roundel in Northern Manchuria to the roundel in Western Manchuria, the
                     path passes only through clear terrain, so the Self-propelled Artillery does not encounter any
                     terrain in its rst movement. For its second movement, the shortest path is a line from the
                     roundel in Western Manchuria to Kerulen. Starting on the border, the Self-propelled Artillery
                     does not su er the mountain penalty from the border mountains on the Western Manchuria
                     side, and enters Kerulen.

                     Terrain marked with the word “impassable” cannot be moved into by land units. Air units can
                      y over. Railroads cannot be built into impassable terrain.



                     1.7.1 Mountains:
                     Movement: All land units immediately end their movement upon crossing or
                     entering mountains. Units cannot blitz crossing or entering mountains.

                     Cavalry are una ected by mountain movement restrictions.

                     Combat: All land units have -1 attack penalty.

                                                                                                                      11
fl




     ff




          fi




               fi




                    fi




                         ff




                              ff




                                                ff




                                                                      ff




                                                                           ff




                                                                                ff




                                                                                     fi




                                                                                          fi
Mountain Infantry, including Foreign Legions and Gurkhas, are una ected by mountain
combat rules, and have +1 defense bonus in mountains.


1.7.2 Deserts:
Movement: All land units immediately end their movement upon crossing or
entering desert. Units cannot blitz crossing or entering desert.
                                                                                       Desert

Combat: All land units have -1 attack penalty.

Foreign Legions are una ected by desert combat rules, and have +1 attack bonus in desert.

Deutsches Afrika Korps (DAK) units are una ected by desert rules.


1.7.3 Jungles:
Movement: All land units immediately end their movement upon crossing or
entering jungle. Units cannot blitz crossing or entering jungle.

Combat: All vehicle-class units have -2 attack/defense penalty.

Gurkhas have +1 attack bonus in jungles.


1.7.4 Marshes:
Movement: All land units immediately end their movement upon crossing or
entering marsh. Units cannot blitz crossing or entering marsh.

Combat: All vehicle-class units have -2 attack/defense penalty.



1.7.5 Tundra/Ice:
Movement: All land units immediately end their movement upon crossing
or entering tundra/ice. Units cannot blitz crossing or entering tundra/ice.

Combat: Only one round of combat per Player Turn. If combat is not
resolved, surviving attacking units must retreat. If retreating is not possible
(e.g. when doing an airborne or amphibious assault (refer to 10.6.1 and 10.8.3)),
attacking units are eliminated.


1.7.6 Rivers:
Rivers are depicted as blue lines on the map. Some rivers form the border between two zones
(bounded on both sides by a border line) and would apply to units crossing in either direction.

Land units that must cross river artwork in the attacked land zone before reaching the roundel
in that land zone are subject to river rules. Apply once per combat per land zone regardless of
the number of rivers crossed.

Combat: All land units except Marines, airborne infantry conducting an airborne assault and
artillery-class units have -1 attack penalty on the rst round of combat.

Strategic Movement: A river can be used for Strategic Rail Movement (refer to 11.2).

Supply Paths: A river can be used to trace Supply Paths (refer to 1.11).


                                                                                                12
           ff




                              ff




                                    fi




                                                      ff
          1.7.7 Cities:
          Cities are indicated by a circular or semi-circular land zone on the map.

          Combat:
          Only three rounds of combat per Player Turn. (Exception: When Japan uses its “Surprise
          Attack” special ability.) If combat is not resolved, surviving attacking units must retreat. If
          retreating is not possible (e.g. when doing an airborne or amphibious assault (refer to 10.6.1
          and 10.8.3)), attacking units are eliminated.

          Cities give attacking vehicle-class units -2 on all rounds of combat. (Exception: When
          Germany uses its “Blitzkrieg” special ability.) If the city is surrounded (see below), attacking
          vehicle-class units do not su er this -2 attack penalty.

          Cities give defending infantry-class units +1 defense bonus on all rounds of combat and
          Target Selection at “1” (versus vehicle-class units). A city that is surrounded (see below) gets
          neither of the above bonuses but instead gives -1 defense penalty to all defending units on all
          rounds of combat.

          Cities have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery against airborne assaults (refer to 10.6.1). If an
          Attacker has developed Airborne Doctrine technology, then Enemy cities no longer have
          inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery (refer to 8.2.1). Cities may be damaged via strategic bombing
          (refer to 10.6.2). Cities have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery against strategic bombing of cities.
          Improved Construction reduces the damage from strategic bombing of cities by 5 per Player
          Turn.

          Forti cations in cities reduce the e ect of carpet bombing by 1 (refer to 13.2.6).

          Surrounded:
          A city is surrounded if all adjacent land zones are Enemy-possessed and if there is no
          undamaged Airbase, port, dockyard or shipyard present. A blockaded Naval Facility is treated
          the same as if it were damaged. If the city borders a neutral or friendly land zone, it cannot be
          surrounded.

          Movement:
          Units cannot blitz out of a city.

          Facilities:
          Can only contain one minor and one major Naval Facility.


          1.7.8 Multiple Terrains:
          Some zones have more than one terrain in them. A player must claim their highest combat
          modi er as well as their lowest combat modi er each combat round (refer to 0.5 (a) and 0.5
          (b)). These may change during the combat as some terrain types only impact the rst round of
          combat.

          Examples of multiple terrains:

          • Mountain cities: A mountain city (i.e. Madrid) gives -1 attack penalty to attacking land units
            and +1 defense bonus for all defending infantry-class units infantry-class units on all rounds
            of combat unless surrounded. Attacking Mountain Infantry do not su er the -1 attack
            penalty. Defending Mountain Infantry do not also gain an additional +1 bonus.
          • Surrounded mountain cities: A surrounded mountain city (i.e. Madrid) imposes a -1 defense
            penalty for all defending units on all rounds of combat. However, defending Mountain
            Infantry would also claim the +1 defense bonus from mountain terrain, so their combined


                                                                                                             13
fi




     fi




                          ff




                                ff




                                              fi




                                                                     ff




                                                                                   fi
                 terrain modi er is 0. The mountains give -1 attack penalty to attacking land units other than
                 Mountain Infantry.
               • Mountain rivers: Mountain Infantry would be subject to the -1 penalty for the river on the
                   rst combat round even though they su er no attack penalty in mountains. Other attacking
                 land units su er -1 attack penalty. Defending Mountain Infantry gain +1 defense bonus.
               • River city: The river would provide -1 attack penalty to the Attacker on the rst round of
                 combat, and the city would provide +1 defense bonus to the Defender on all rounds of
                 combat.


               1.8 Straits and Canals:
               Straits and canals are strategically important waterways. Straits are labeled with the
               name of the strait and canals are labeled and marked with the canal symbol. Naval
               units and aircraft move through straits or canals like they would crossing sea zone
               borders.

               Passage through a strait or canal can be restricted by the owner. The primary di erence
               between canals and straits is that a strait is located between two sea zones and a canal is
               located in a land zone. Units cannot end their movement in a canal. A canal is considered a
               sea zone border for the purpose of tracking movement. (Note that you cannot y over an
               Enemy-possessed canal if its controlling land zone contains Enemy ghters (refer to 9.3 and
               11.3)). A canal can be used as a river to trace Supply Paths and Strategic Naval Movement.
               Attacking across a canal gives the same attack penalties as a river (refer to 1.7.6). There are
               several restrictions regarding movement through straits and canals:

               • Land units can cross a canal but not a strait.
               • Aircraft may y over a neutral nation’s straits and canals, even if closed.
               • Submarines can move through closed straits but not closed canals.


               Strait                Controlling Land Zone                  Closure
               Strait of Gibraltar   Gibraltar                              Owner of Gibraltar closes to nations
                                                                            with whom it is at war.
               Danish Straits        Denmark                                The Danish Straits are closed to
                                                                            British Commonwealth, French, Free
                                                                            French and USA Surface Ships until
                                                                            Denmark is in Allies’ Possession/
                                                                            Control. Soviet and German
                                                                            Warships may move through the
                                                                            straits while Denmark is neutral.

                                                                            Once Denmark is captured, the
                                                                            owner closes to nations with whom
                                                                            it is at war.


               Forcing a Strait:
               A nation may attempt to force its navy through a closed strait. The Defending player
               controlling the strait gets to shoot at each forcing Surface Ship at “3”. Roll each one
               separately. This is in addition to any Coastal Artillery at the narrow crossing the Defending
               player may have. Forcing a strait is a Declaration of War on the owner of the strait, and subject
               to all restrictions thereof.

               Example: A British eet consisting of one Battleship and one Destroyer wants to force the
               German-controlled Danish Straits. The German player rolls a “2” for the Battleship and scores
               a hit. The German player rolls a “6” for the Destroyer and misses.



                                                                                                                   14
fi




     fi




          fl




          ff




                    fl




                                         ff




                                                                       fi




                                                                                  fi




                                                                                       fl




                                                                                            ff
Canal                      Controlling Land Zone            Closure
Panama Canal               Panama                           Owner of Panama closes to
                                                            nations with whom it is at war.
Suez Canal                 Lower Egypt                      Owner of Lower Egypt closes
                                                            to nations with whom it is at
                                                            war.
Kaiser-Wilhelm Kanal       Western Germany                  Owner of Western Germany
                                                            can freely permit or deny
                                                            passage to neutral nations.
                                                            Owner of Western Germany
                                                            closes to nations with whom it
                                                            is at war.
Baltic-White Sea Canal * Leningrad & Karelia                If one player Possesses both
                                                            Leningrad and Karelia, then
                                                            that player may freely permit or
                                                            deny passage to neutral
                                                            nations. If two di erent players
                                                            Possess Leningrad and Karelia,
                                                            both must permit passage or
                                                            the canal is closed.
Turkish Straits **         Istanbul                         Owner of Istanbul can freely
                                                            permit or deny passage to
                                                            neutral nations. Owner of
                                                            Istanbul closes to nations with
                                                            whom it is at war.

                                                            Turkey, while neutral:
                                                            • Closes to all Carriers and
                                                              Battleships
                                                            • Closes to any nation at war
                                                              with a Major Power.
                                                              (Exception: USSR can trace a
                                                              Supply Path via its
                                                              “International Red Aid”
                                                              special ability).

                                                            Turkey, while Controlled:
                                                            • Controlling nation can freely
                                                              permit or deny passage to
                                                              neutral nations.
St. Lawrence Seaway        Ottawa                           Owner of Ottawa can freely
                                                            permit or deny passage to
                                                            neutral nations. Owner of
                                                            Ottawa closes to nations with
                                                            whom it is at war.

* The Baltic-White Sea Canal connects Leningrad with the White Sea. The canal may be used
to non-combat move one submarine per Player Turn between sea zone A14 and sea zone A9
(in either direction). The submarine must start its move in either sea zone A9 or A14, and it
expends its full movement (including any bonuses) to make the move. The Baltic-White Sea
Canal can be used to deliver Lend-lease to Leningrad.
** Turkish Straits are signi cantly narrow enough that they are considered a canal.




                                                                                               15
   ff




            fi
1.9 Narrow Crossings:
Some sea zones are marked with a line between land zones – a narrow
crossing.

A player may combat move Marines across narrow crossings in an           Narrow crossing
amphibious assault. A player may also non-combat move infantry-class     within a sea zone.
units across. The units must begin on one side of the crossing and end
their move on the other, as if they were adjacent. Units may not use
Strategic Rail Movement to make the crossing. The number of units that may
be moved across is printed on the line.

The presence of Coastal Artillery in the attacked land zone prevents
combat movement across a narrow crossing. Enemy Surface Warships,      Narrow crossing
non-Submerged submarines or aircraft on Maritime Air Patrol in any sea touching 3 sea zones.
zone touching a narrow crossing line, prevent both combat and non-
combat movement across a narrow crossing. Coastal Artillery located at
narrow crossings may re at Enemy Surface Ships crossing the narrow crossing (refer to
13.2.7).


1.10 Special Forti cation Areas:
Some areas on the map are so small that a single Forti cation and/or Coastal Artillery protects
the entire zone regardless of how many land or sea zones they border. These areas are:

• All city land zones
• Panama
• British Malaya
• Crimea


1.11 Supply Paths:
Supply Paths are virtually traced across the map when required (they are not actually shown
on the map). A Supply Path can be traced any distance and does not require a transport nor
use up rail capacity. A Supply Path can be traced as follows:

• By Land: The Supply Path must travel along rivers and/or railroads that have been
  undamaged, and possessed by you or a controlled/Aligned nation, since the beginning of
  the Player Turn. A Supply Path can consist of a combination of railroads and rivers. If a river
  travels between two land zones, one side may not be possessed by an Enemy nation.
• By Sea: The Supply Path must travel via ports, dockyards or shipyards within range that
  have been undamaged, and possessed by you or a controlled/Aligned nation, since the
  beginning of the Player Turn. Minor Naval Facilities have a Supply Path range of 2. Major
  Naval Facilities have a Supply Path range of 4. A Supply Path starts traveling by sea in the
  sea zone adjacent to the originating Naval Facility (i.e. without consuming Supply Path
  range). Supply Path range may then be “refreshed” by controlled/Aligned Naval Facilities
  adjacent to a sea zone in the traced Supply Path. A Naval Facility may not be used more
  than once for any given Supply Path. A supply path enters the destination Naval Facility
  adjacent to the nal sea zone without consuming Supply Path range. Players may give each
  other permission to use straits and canals in their Possession (refer to 1.8). Germany has a
  “Condor Legion” special ability, which gives +1 Supply Path range when delivering Lend-
  lease to the Spanish Nationalists (refer to 15.1).

Example: To trace a Supply Path to its Minor Factory in Cape Town, Great Britain can trace a
Supply Path from its Major Shipyard in Southern England / A21, via three sea zones (A28, A35,
A44) to the Major Dockyard in Gibraltar / A44, then four sea zones (A46, A48, A51, A53) to the
Minor Port in St. Helena / A53, then one sea zone (A54) to the Minor Port in Cape Town.


                                                                                              16
  fi




         fi




              fi




                                          fi
Once a Supply Path has re-entered land zones from sea zones, it cannot move across more
sea zones. Enemy units can prevent the tracing of Supply Paths by either blockade (refer to
9.4.6) or interdiction (refer to 12.5).


1.12 Burma and Ledo Roads:
Allows tracing a Supply Path through the otherwise impassable Himalayan Mountains for
Lend-lease delivery. It cannot be strategically bombed. It requires the following four conditions
in order to be open:

1. It must be July, 1938 or later.
2. Japan and KMT are at war.
3. KMT Possesses Yunnan.
4. The Allies Possess Burma.

While the Burma Road is open, KMT may purchase Artillery and Anti-aircraft Artillery in
Yunnan. The Ledo Road extends the Burma Road to Bengal. Same conditions and rules apply,
but the Allies must also Possess Bengal.



1.13 Northern Sea Route:
The Northern Sea Route is a passage across the northern edge of USSR (o the map). USSR
can move one naval unit per Player Turn between sea zones A9 and P1 (in either direction).
The unit must start its move in either sea zone A9 or P1, and it expends its full movement
(including any bonuses) to make the move. USSR may give other nations permission to use
this route.



1.14 Great Barrier Reef:
It is not possible to make amphibious assaults into Queensland from sea zones P64, P71 &
P72.




                                                                                              17
                                                               ff
                            Chapter 2 - Setting Up

2.1 Assign Players
Global War 1936-1945 is a game for 3—6 players. Depending on the number of players,
assign nations accordingly:

                                      3 Players      4 Players      5 Players     6 Players

Germany                                    1              1             1              1
Italy                                      1              1             1              6
Japan                                      1              4             4              4
CCP                                        2              2             2              2
USSR                                       2              2             2              2
Great Britain                              3              3             3              3
FEC                                        3              3             3              3
ANZAC                                      3              3             3              3
France                                     3              3             3              3
KMT                                        3              3             5              5
USA                                        3              3             5              5

Five is the ideal number of players. If playing with more than six players, assign them either
CCP, KMT or France.



2.2 National Reference Sheets
Each nation has a national reference sheet that contains important information needed to play
that nation. Most information contained on the national reference sheets can also be found in
this rulebook.



2.3 Setup
Set up units and facilities for each nation as described in the setup chart on the national
reference sheets. This includes ships in various stages of production on the build queue in the
corner of the map.


2.4 Starting Income
Give each nation its starting IPPs as shown on the IPP
tracker with a small roundel. Starting income is also listed on
the national reference sheets.




                                                                                                 18
2.5 Income, Turn & Wartime Bonus Tracker
Place the calendar marker on the top of the IPP tracking chart to indicate the Calendar Turn of
round 1 - July, 1936.

The IPP tracking chart also shows large opaque roundels signifying important events for that
nation once that income level is reached.

At the bottom of the IPP tracking chart is a table to track the Wartime Bonus Income for each
nation.




                                                                                            19
                                       Chapter 3 - Victory

     3.1 Winning
     The Alliance with the highest number of victory points at the end of the game, wins. Victory
     points can be scored by possessing victory cities and by completing strategic objectives.

     In order to score victory points, nations must be at war with a Major Power. A nation that has
     surrendered cannot score any victory points.



     3.2 Victory Cities
     There are 10 victory cities, each worth 1 victory point, unless destroyed (refer to 10.6.2):

     • Berlin                    • London              • Paris                  • Nanking
     • Rome                      • Calcutta            • Moscow
     • Tokyo                     • Sydney              • Stalingrad


     3.3 Strategic Objectives
     There are 10 strategic objective points available to each Alliance. Each strategic objective
     yields a bonus that is e ective immediately, as soon as the conditions are met. At the end of
     the game, each strategic objective is worth one or more victory points. Most strategic
     objectives require the conditions to currently be met to gain victory points, but there are
     certain strategic objectives which provide a victory point even if the conditions were only met
     temporarily. Bonuses that provide a unit or facility each Player Turn allow placement of that
     unit/facility in the Place Units Phase.

     Example: Germany conquers Denmark and has land units in all seven land zones along the
     coast from Denmark to Aquitaine at the end of the Combat Phase. It has now completed the
     “Festung Europa” strategic objective and scores 1 victory point when calculating victory points
     at game end. Each Player Turn the condition was met during the Non-combat Movement
     Phase, Germany may place 1 Forti cation or 1 Coastal Artillery as pieces of the “Atlantic Wall”
     in one of these land zones. If Germany later loses the strategic objective due to not maintaining
     units in all seven required land zones, it no longer gets to place 1 Forti cation or 1 Coastal
     Artillery each Player Turn, but does get to keep the elements of the “Atlantic Wall” already
     placed on the board.

     Axis

                     Objective                    Point(s) Bonus
                     Festung Europa.                         1 Forti cation or 1 Coastal Artillery to
                                                             be placed in one of these land zones
              At least one German land                       as pieces of the “Atlantic Wall” (each
              unit is present in all seven                   Player Turn).
      Germany coastal land zones from                 1
              Denmark to Aquitaine at
              the end of the German
              Non-combat Movement
              Phase.


                                                                                                        20
fi




                ff




                           fi




                                                                fi
                               Objective                       Point(s) Bonus
                               Lebensraum.                             1 Minor Factory in two of the three
                                                                       possessed Soviet cities (once per
                               Possess 3 Soviet city land              game).
                    Germany zones.                               2*
                                                                       * One of the points can not be taken
                                                                       away.
                               Spanish Civil War.                      1 Blue Division (regular Infantry) to be
                                                                       placed in Madrid or in the German
                            The Nationalists win the                   Capital (each Player Turn).
                            Spanish Civil War. Spain is
                            subsequently neutral or
                    Germany Aligned with Germany.                1

                               (If Madrid is ever captured
                               by an Enemy Alliance,
                               Germany loses the
                               objective).
                               Paci c Bu er Zone.                      1 Forti cation or 1 Coastal Artillery to
                                                                       be placed on one of these Islands
                     Japan     Possess Wake, Midway,
                                                                 1     (each Player Turn).
                               Attu & Kiska and Guam.
                               Kidō Butai.                             Capital Ships can be built for -1 IPP
                                                                       per stage, per ship.
                               Japan has more
                               undamaged Capital Ships                 Note this may stack with Improved
                               in the Paci c than the Allies           Construction technology for a total of
                     Japan     while at war with an Allies’
                                                                 1     -2 IPP per stage, per ship.
                               Major Power. Each Heavy
                               Battleship and Heavy
                               Carrier count as two.
                               (Note: Ships in port count.)
                               Access to Resources.                    1 additional Strategic Rail Movement
                                                                       in all regions (each Player Turn).
                     Japan                                       1     1 additional Strategic Naval
                               Possess all of Manchukuo,
                               Borneo, Java and Sumatra.               Movement (each Player Turn).
                               Asia for Asians.                        1 Minor Factory to be placed in one of
                                                                       these land zones (once per game).
                     Japan     Possess Burma, Siam,              1     1 Airbase to be placed in one of these
                               Cochinchina, Annam Tonkin               land zones (once per game).
                               and British Malaya.
                               Impero Italiano.                        1 Airbase to be placed in an Italian-
                                                                       possessed city land zone (once per
                               Possess Albania, Cyprus,                game).
                               Malta and all of Greece.
                                                                       New special ability: Able to trace a
                                                                       Supply Path between two Airbases.
                                                                       The Airbases must be within range of
                      Italy                                      1
                                                                       5 zones which are free of Enemy
                                                                       Fighters. May trace over neutral
                                                                       straits and canals, but not neutral
                                                                       land zones. This Supply Path cannot
                                                                       be interdicted. (Note: This special
                                                                       ability is permanent even if the
                                                                       objective is lost.)



                                                                                                                  21
fi




     fi




          ff




               fi
                     Objective                        Point(s) Bonus
                     Africa Orientale Italiana.                  2 Militia, 1 Airbase and 1 Minor
                                                                 Factory to be placed in Eritrea,
             Italy   Possess Eritrea, Abyssinia
                                                        1        Abyssinia or Italian Somaliland (once
                     & Italian Somaliland.                       per game).




          Allies

                               Objective              Point(s)                   Bonus
                     African Colonialism.                        1 Airbase to be placed in any British
                                                                 Commonwealth-possessed land
           British Lower Egypt and Cape Town                     zone in Africa (once per game).
          Common- connected via undamaged                1
           wealth railroad in British                            1 additional Strategic Rail Movement
                     Commonwealth-possessed                      in Africa (each Player Turn).
                     land zones.
                     The Sun Never Sets.                         1 additional Strategic Naval
           British                                               Movement (each Player Turn).
          Common- Possess Gibraltar, Malta,              2
           wealth Lower Egypt, Cape Town &
                     British Malaya.
                     A World Power.                              1 Foreign Legion to be placed in a
                                                                 land zone with an IPP value France
                     France is a Major Power at                  has possessed since the beginning
                     war with an Axis Major                      of the Player Turn (each Player Turn).
                     Power.
                                                                 * If Paris is liberated, one of the
            France   Note: This can happen either        2*      points can not be taken away.
                     before surrendering to
                     Germany early in the war or
                     after Paris has been liberated
                     and France has been
                     resurrected, or both.
                     Chinese Civil War.                          1 Major Factory to be placed in a
                                                                 city land zone or
             KMT     Evolve to Major Power.              1       1 Medium Factory to be placed in a
                                                                 land zone (once per game, refer to
                                                                 14.3.1).
                     Sphere of In uence.                         1 additional Strategic Naval
                                                                 Movement (each Player Turn).
             USA     Possess Wake, Midway, Attu
                                                         1
                     & Kiska and Guam.
                     Big Blue Fleet.                             Capital Ships can be built for -1 IPP
                                                                 per stage, per ship.
                     USA has Twice as many
                     undamaged Capital Ships in                  Note this may stack with Improved
             USA     the Paci c as Japan. Each
                                                         1       Construction technology for a total
                     Heavy Battleship and Heavy                  of -2 IPP per stage, per ship.
                     Carrier count as two.
                     (Note: Ships in port count.)



                                                                                                          22
fi




     fl
                         Objective              Point(s)                  Bonus
               Triumph of Capitalism.                      USA can place one of its purchased
                                                           units at an eligible factory in Great
               USA is at war with a Major                  Britain’s Home Country (each Player
               Power and the combined                      Turn). This does not a ect the
       USA     incomes (including bonuses)
                                                      1    production capacity of the factory
               of Great Britain and USA are                for the Great Britain player.
               more than twice the income
               of USSR (including bonuses).
               American Technological                      1 B-29, 1 Jet Fighter & 1 Strategic
               Supremacy.                                  Rocket to be placed at an eligible
                                                           factory (once per game).
               Have researched:                       1
       USA
               • Heavy Strategic Bombers
               • Long-range Aircraft
               • Strategic Rockets
               • Jet Fighters



     Comintern

                        Objective              Point(s)                   Bonus
               Chinese Civil War.                          1 Major Factory to be placed in a city
                                                           land zone or
       CCP     Evolve to Major Power.             1        1 Medium Factory to be placed in a
                                                           land zone (once per game, refer to
                                                           14.3.1).
               One China.                                  3 Cavalry and 2 Infantry (if CCP
                                                           possesses a land zone at time of
               KMT possesses no Chinese                    KMT surrender) (once per game)
       CCP     Home Country land zones
                                                  1
               (exception: Formosa or
               Hainan).
               Paci c Expansion.                           1 additional Strategic Rail Movement
                                                           in all regions (each Player Turn).
               Possess South Sakhalin                      1 additional Strategic Naval
               and all of Manchukuo.                       Movement (each Player Turn).
      USSR                                        1
               (If all of Manchukuo are
               possessed by an Enemy
               Alliance, USSR loses the
               objective).
               Winter War.                                 Move two of the following three
                                                           technologies up one stage: Advanced
      USSR     Possess Helsinki.                  1        Artillery, Advanced Mechanized
                                                           Infantry or Heavy Armor (once per
                                                           game).
               Rapid Industrialization.                    1 technology die roll (each Player
                                                           Turn).
      USSR     Possess all city land zones        1
               in Soviet Home Country at
               the start of the Player Turn.


                                                                                                    23
fi




          ff
                                   Objective          Point(s)                    Bonus
                       Soviet Technological                      1 Jet Fighter and 1 Strategic Rocket
                       Supremacy.                                to be placed at an eligible factory
                                                                 (once per game).
             USSR                                        1
                       Have researched:
                       • Jet Fighters
                       • Strategic Rockets
                       Spanish Civil War.                        1 International Brigade (regular
                                                                 Infantry) to be placed in Madrid or in
                       The Republicans win the                   the Soviet Capital (each Player Turn).
                       Spanish Civil War. Spain is
                       subsequently neutral or
             USSR      Aligned with USSR.
                                                         1

                       (If Madrid is ever captured
                       by an Enemy Alliance,
                       USSR loses the objective).
                       Access to the                             Can use its Factory Movement
                       Mediterranean.                            special ability to move 1 Minor
                                                                 Factory outside Home Country (each
             USSR      Possess Istanbul.                 1       Player Turn). This consumes 1
                                                                 Strategic Rail Movement capacity.
                                                                 May move across di erent railroad
                                                                 gauges.
                       European Bu er Zone.                      1 Forti cation to be placed in Warsaw
                                                                 and 2 Infantry to be placed in Central
                       Possess Warsaw and                        Romania (once per game).
             USSR                                        2*
                       Central Romania.
                                                                 * One of the points can not be taken
                                                                 away.




          3.4 Ending the Game
          Beginning July, 1944, victory points are counted at the end of each Calendar Turn. The USA
          player rolls a D12 after its Player Turn is nished. Subtract 1 from what the USA player rolled
          for the game end die roll for each Enemy-possessed Originally owned Major Power Capital
          (Berlin, Tokyo, Rome, Moscow, Washington, D.C., London, Paris, Calcutta and Sydney). The
          game ends on the following modi ed roll:

          Turn                                                       Modified Die Roll:
          July 1944                                                 Less than or equal to 1
          January 1945                                              Less than or equal to 2
          July 1945                                                 Less than or equal to 3
          January 1946                                              Less than or equal to 5
          Each turn thereafter                                      Less than or equal to 6

          Example: It’s July 1944 and thus the game ends on a “less than or equal to 1”. There is one
          Enemy-possessed Originally owned Major Power Capital (Paris). The USA player rolls a “2” on
          his game end die roll, and due to Paris being Enemy-possessed, the roll is modi ed to a 1.
          Since this is less than or equal to the target number, the game ends.


                                                                                                          24
fi




     ff




                 ff




                              fi




                                       fi




                                                                             fi
3.4.1 Sudden Death
If the game end die roll would end the game when two or more Alliances are tied for rst, the
game enters Sudden Death. Instead of game end die rolls being made at the end of each
Calendar Turn, they may now be made at the end of a Player Turn once the tie for rst has
been broken. The Alliance with the greatest number of victory points may make one game end
die roll at the end of a Player Turn, once per Calendar Turn. If another Alliance takes the lead
later in that same Calendar Turn, they may make one game end die roll at the end of a Player
Turn, once per Calendar Turn. Note that each Alliance may only make one game end die roll
per Calendar Turn, even if they should retake the lead later in the same turn.

In Sudden Death, no game end die rolls are made at the end of a Player Turn when two or
more Alliances are tied for rst. The game continues.

Example: It is July, 1944, turn 17, and the Axis are tied with the Comintern at 7 victory points
each. The game end die roll is made at the end of the Calendar Turn and it is low enough to
end the game. As the victory points are tied, the game enters Sudden Death. On Germany’s
turn 18, it achieves “Festung Europa”. This grants the Axis a victory point and moves them into
the lead with 8 victory points. The Axis elect to try and end the game by making a game end
die roll at the end of Germany’s turn. The die roll fails. Later that same turn, CCP evolves to a
Major Power, granting the Comintern a victory point for “Chinese Civil War”. The score is now
tied 8-8, so Comintern is not able to try and end the game by making a game end die roll at the
end of CCP’s turn. On USSR’s turn 18, they capture Istanbul and achieve “Access to the
Mediterranean”. This moves them into the lead with 9 victory points, and enables them to try
and end the game by making a game end die roll at the end of USSR’s turn.




                                                                                              25
             fi




                                                                      fi




                                                                           fi
                     Chapter 4 - National Relations

4.1 Major Powers:
There are 7 Major Powers: Germany, Japan, Italy, British Commonwealth, France, USA, and
USSR.


4.2 Minor Powers:
All other nations are Minor Powers. Two, KMT and CCP, may evolve into a Major Power (refer
to 14.3).


4.3 Alliances:
There are three Alliances in the game – Axis, Allies, and Comintern.

                             Axis                     Allies                Comintern
Major Powers • Germany                         • British             • USSR
                   • Japan                       Commonwealth
                   • Italy                     • France
                                               • USA

Minor Powers • Dadao Government • Free France        • CCP
(controlled by) (Japan)         • Abyssinia (France) • Mongolia (USSR)
                   • Siam (Japan)         • KMT                      • Spanish Republicans
                   • Spanish Nationalists                              (USSR)
                     (Germany)
                   • Vichy (Germany)

Nations not part of an Alliance are neutral.



4.4 Neutrality:
A Major Power is neutral until it is at war with another Major Power (even if it is at war with a
Minor Power). A Minor Power is neutral towards any Major Power that has not declared war on
it until it is Aligned with a Major Power.

Example: Japan is neutral even if it is at war with unevolved KMT and CCP because KMT and
CCP are Minor Powers until they evolve.


4.5 Controlling:
The term “Control” refers to a limited level of decision-making a Major Power may have over a
non-Aligned Minor Power. This can occur when the Minor Power is attacked by another Major
Power.

Axis                                              Allies
Nations come under Axis Control if they are       Nations come under Allies’ Control if they
attacked by the Allies.                           are attacked by the Axis or Comintern.



                                                                                               26
Axis                                              Allies
Assign Control
Closest Axis Major Power Home Country             Americas (USA)
                                                  All others (GB)


Minor Powers become controlled at the end of the Combat Phase after being attacked. During
the combat phase before becoming controlled, the Major Power which will gain control rolls
for the attacked Minor Power, chooses casualties, and makes any scrambling decisions. Once
a nation is controlled, attacks by Major Powers do not change Control, but may cause the
controlled nation to Align (refer to 4.6 and 4.7).

If a Major Power Controls a Minor Power, the Major Power may:

• Move the Minor Power’s units, including combat movement if already at war.
• Fly over the Minor Power’s land zones.
• Make recruitment rolls.
• Trace a Supply Path using the Minor Power’s Naval Facilities and through the Minor Power’s
  land zones.

The controlling Major Power may not, on behalf of the controlled Minor Power:

• Declare war or take actions that put the Minor Power at war with any Major or Minor power
  it is not already at war with.
• Collect income.
• Send Lend-lease.
• Develop technology.
• Engage in diplomacy.
Example: USSR and British Commonwealth are not at war. USSR declares war on Turkey and
captures Eastern Anatolia. Turkey comes under British Control. On Great Britain’s Player Turn it
Controls Turkey, and could move Turkish forces inside Turkey, use them to Attack Soviet units
and make a recruitment roll for Turkey. British aircraft can y over Turkey since Turkey is British
controlled.

Exceptions: Minor Powers with a national reference sheet (CCP, KMT and Free France) are not
handled through this process. Refer to their national reference sheets for how they may act.

When a controlled nation is at war with the same Major Power as the controlling nation, the
Minor Power Aligns immediately. (Exception: Turkey).

Example: British Commonwealth and Italy are not at war. Great Britain attacks Greece. After
the British Combat Phase, Greece becomes controlled by Italy, as it is the closest Axis Major
Power. Had British Commonwealth and Italy been at war, Greece would have immediately
Aligned with Italy.


4.6 Aligning:
Nations that are members of the same Alliance become “Aligned” when they are at war with
the same Major Power. Minor Powers Align with Major Powers under certain conditions.

Units from Nations that are Aligned with one another may:

• Enter, move through, or y over Friendly land zones.
• Defend with other Aligned units.


                                                                                                27
           fl




                                             fl
• Use Friendly bases and Naval Facilities for tracing supply, movement bonus and
  scrambling.
• Use Friendly dockyards and shipyards for repairing Capital Ships.
Note: Aircraft may not utilize Carriers from another Major Power.

When a Minor Power Aligns with a Major Power it becomes fully incorporated and ceases to
exist. This means all the Minor Power’s land zones and units are now possessed by the Major
Power. The Minor Power’s sculpts are replaced by the corresponding Major Power’s sculpts.
Free France, CCP and KMT are exceptions to this rule as they do not become incorporated
into a Major Power when they Align, but are run as separate nations.

The phase of the Player Turn that a Minor Power Aligns determines what the Major Power may
do with the Minor Power’s units and land zones in the same Player Turn.

Example: If a Minor Power Aligns in the Production Phase, the Major Power can use any of its
units in the following phases, as well as land aircraft in the Minor Power’s land zones in the
same Player Turn.

Note: If the Aligning Minor Power has more Militia in a land zone than allowed (refer to 12.1),
these stay in the zone.



4.7 Special Alignment and Control Conditions:
Some nations have special alignment or control conditions. For details about the Molotov-
Ribbentrop Pact, refer to 6.4.

Nation           Aligns with        Condition

Bulgaria,        Germany            Bulgaria, Hungary & Romania Align with Germany if
                                    attacked by USSR (exceptions: Sphere of In uence,
Hungary &
                                    (refer to 4.8) and Molotov-Ribbentrop, (refer to 6.4)).
Romania
                                    After France has surrendered, Germany may, in the three
                                    subsequent Place Units Phases, Align one of these three
                                    nations per Player Turn. These nations may be Aligned
                                    even if currently controlled. As soon as Germany is at
                                    war with USSR, the remaining nations Align.

                                    If the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact has been signed:
                                    USSR may Annex Bessarabia. USSR may not attack
                                    further into Central Romania. If USSR Annexes
                                    Bessarabia, the rest of Romania becomes a neutral
                                    Minor Power controlled by Germany, and Aligns with
                                    Germany when Germany and USSR are at war. Note:
                                    Germany does not get +3 Wartime Bonus Income from
                                    Romania as long as Bessarabia is possessed by USSR.
Sweden           Germany            If USSR declares war on a neutral Sweden, Norway or
                                    Denmark, Sweden Aligns with Germany at the end of the
                                    Soviet Combat Phase.
Turkey           N/A                Turkey never Aligns with a Major Power.




                                                                                                  28
                               fl
Nation        Aligns with       Condition
Finland       Germany           If the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact has not been signed:
                                If attacked, refer to 4.5.

                                If the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact has been signed:
                                If attacked by the Axis or Allies, refer to 4.5.
                                If attacked by USSR:
                                • Finland becomes a neutral Minor Power controlled by
                                   Germany.
                                • If the Moscow Peace Treaty (refer to 6.5) has been
                                   signed, Finland will not Align with Germany at the time
                                   Germany and USSR declare war on one another.
                                • If the Moscow Peace Treaty has not been signed (or
                                   has been broken), Finland Aligns with Germany when
                                   Germany and USSR are at war.
Iraq          Germany / Italy   If, at the beginning of the German / Italian Production
                                Phase there is a German or Italian land unit in a land
                                zone adjacent to a neutral or British-controlled Iraq, Iraq
                                Aligns with the corresponding Axis nation.
Nationalist   Germany           Will Align with Germany after the Attacker's Combat
Spain                           Phase if attacked by the Allies or Comintern or if Axis
                                Possesses either:
                                    (a) London or
                                    (b) Both Gibraltar and Lower Egypt.
Vichy         Germany           If attacked by anyone besides Free France, Vichy will
                                Align with Germany after the Attacker’s Combat Phase.
                                (Exception: When Great Britain uses its “Operation
                                Catapult” special ability.)
Republican    USSR              If attacked, Republican Spain Aligns with USSR at the
                                end of the Attacker's Combat Phase.
Spain
Mongolia &    USSR              Mongolia begins the game as a USSR-controlled
                                Comintern Minor Power. As long as controlled, Mongolia
Tannu Tuva
                                gets recruitment rolls.

                                If attacked by KMT, Mongolia does not Align with USSR.

                                If Mongolia or Tannu Tuva are otherwise attacked, they
                                Align with USSR at the end of the Attacker's Combat
                                Phase. If USSR is at war with a Major Power, they Align
                                immediately.
Dadao      Japan                If attacked by a non-Chinese faction, it Aligns with Japan
                                at the end of the Attacker's Combat Phase.
Government
                                Aligns with Japan at the end of the Japanese Combat
                                Phase if Japan is at war with China and is at war with a
                                Major Power.
Siam          Japan             Siam begins the game as a Japanese-controlled Axis
                                Minor Power. As long as controlled, Siam gets
                                recruitment rolls.

                                In the Production Phase of the Japanese January, 1939
                                turn, Siam Aligns with Japan.
Poland        Great Britain     If Poland is not controlled by a Major Power, Poland
                                Aligns with Great Britain as soon as Great Britain is at
                                war with a Major Power.



                                                                                              29
     4.8 Soviet Sphere of In uence:
     USSR considers all land zones adjacent to its Home Country to be within its sphere of
     in uence if they were Originally possessed by a neutral Minor Power. Within this sphere, USSR
     can attack without a declaration of war, even if the neutral nation has previously Aligned with
     another Major Power. If the Minor Power has not previously Aligned, it becomes controlled and
     is at war with USSR.

     Example: Germany and Great Britain are at war. Germany has declared war on Poland, but has
     not captured Podlachia, Lubelskie or East Poland. These land zones subsequently Align with
     Great Britain. USSR may attack these land zones as they are within its sphere of in uence.
     Such an attack would not require a Declaration of War against Great Britain.

     Example: Korea is Originally possessed by Japan, so it is not within USSR’s sphere of
     in uence.

     Example: Sinkiang is Originally possessed by a Chinese warlord (refer to 4.9), so it is not within
     USSR’s sphere of in uence.

     Example: Mongolia is not a neutral Minor Power, so it is not within USSR’s sphere of in uence.



     4.9 China:
     Many regions of China are controlled by regional warlords, each marked with their own
     warlord roundel and individually colored for identi cation. These land zones are:
     • Sinkiang
     • Tsinghai
     • Suiyuan
     • Beiping and Hopeh
     • Tibet
     • Sikang
     • Yunnan
     • Kwangtung and Hainan

     Each of the eight warlords is separate and has its own roundel (so Beiping and Hopeh have
     the same roundel, and Kwangtung and Hainan have the same roundel). To outside nations,
     these semi-autonomous provinces are considered part of KMT. (Note they are not considered
     Originally KMT).

     KMT cannot attack Chinese warlords until CCP is eliminated. If KMT subsequently attacks a
     warlord, it Aligns with CCP (e ectively reviving CCP).

     If a warlord is attacked by CCP or the Dadao Government, it and all its remaining land zones
     and units Aligns with KMT at the end of the Attacker’s Combat Phase. If KMT has surrendered,
     the warlord does not Align, but stays neutral.

     An attack by a foreign nation on an Originally possessed warlord, CCP or KMT land zone
     (excluding the Dadao Government, if created, refer to 15.4), is considered declaration of war
     on all of China and causes all warlords to Align with either CCP or KMT (or the Dadao
     Government if has been created) at the end of the Attacker’s Combat Phase. If a warlord is not
     bordering a CCP-possessed or Dadao Government-Possessed land zone, it Aligns with KMT.
     If a warlord is bordering a CCP-possessed land zone, it will potentially Align with CCP. If a
     warlord is bordering a Dadao Government-Possessed land zone, it will potentially Align with
     Dadao Government. For each land zone, roll a D12:




                                                                                                     30
fl
fl




           fl




                     ff




                          fl




                                          fi




                                                                            fl




                                                                                 fl
      Land zone borders CCP and                     Land zone borders only CCP or
          Dadao Government                               Dadao Government
  Dice #                 Action                   Dice #                Action
                                                               Aligns with CCP or Dadao
    1-5             Aligns with CCP.               1-6                Government.
   6-10             Aligns with KMT.               7-12             Aligns with KMT.

  11-12     Aligns with Dadao Government.



4.10 Spain
After the resolution of the Spanish Civil War, Spain becomes a controlled neutral Minor Power.

Nationalist Victory:
If the Spanish Nationalists have won the Spanish Civil War, Spain becomes a German-
controlled neutral Minor Power called Nationalist Spain. As long as controlled, Nationalist
Spain gets recruitment rolls (refer to 12.7). Until Madrid is captured by an Enemy Alliance,
every Player Turn, Germany gets a free “Blue Division” (regular Infantry) in the Place Units
Phase in Madrid or in the German Capital. Germany can use Spain’s Naval Facilities for
repairs, tracing supply, in port and movement bonus. (Note that German naval transports may
only go in port without cargo).

Will Align with Germany after the Attacker's Combat Phase if attacked by the Allies or
Comintern or if Axis Possesses either:
   (a) London or
   (b) Both Gibraltar and Lower Egypt.

Axis Powers may not attack a neutral Nationalist Spain.

Republican Victory:
If the Spanish Republicans have won the Spanish Civil War, Spain becomes a USSR-
controlled neutral Minor Power called Republican Spain. As long as controlled, Republican
Spain gets recruitment rolls (refer to 12.7). Until Madrid is captured by an Enemy Alliance,
every Player Turn, USSR gets a free “International Brigade” (regular Infantry) in the Place Units
Phase in Madrid or in the Soviet Capital. USSR can use Spain’s Naval Facilities for repairs,
tracing supply, in port and movement bonus. (Note that Soviet naval transports may only go in
port without cargo).

Will Align with USSR after the Attacker's Combat Phase if attacked by the Allies or Axis.
Comintern Powers may not attack a neutral Republican Spain.



4.11 France

4.11.1 French Surrender
France surrenders immediately when either:

• Paris is Enemy-possessed or
• All land zones surrounding Paris are Enemy-possessed.
All IPP currently in Possession of the French player are surrendered to the conquering Major
Power.



                                                                                               31
If France surrenders due to Paris being surrounded, the conquering nation may non-combat
move land units into Paris, even if these have moved during the Combat Movement Phase.

Once France surrenders, the French player takes command of Free France, an Allies’ Minor
Power. If French surrender conditions are reversed (i.e. Paris is liberated), Free France will
become “France” again with Paris as its Capital. Note that France only surrenders once per
game.

Example: Paris is liberated by the Allies and France is resurrected. The turn after, Germany
counter-attacks and captures Paris for a second time. This time, France does not surrender,
but the French player lose his IPP to the bank and may relocate his Capital (refer to 10.10.2
and 10.10.3).

4.11.2 Vichy Creation                                          Order           Vichy Rolls
If France surrenders in the German Player Turn, the
German player creates a new Axis Minor Power called               1     Roll for French naval units
Vichy, immediately after the French surrender.
                                                                  2     Roll for French land zones
Roundels:
Place a Vichy roundel on Corsica and Southern France and a German roundel on all remaining
land zones in French Home Country. Remove all French non-naval units in French Home
Country & Corsica. Move all Axis units out of Vichy land zones to the closest Axis-possessed
land zone.

Other Forces:
If Paris is encircled with Allies’ units in it, those units surrender with Paris and are removed
from the game. If Paris was captured, Allies’ land units or aircraft in other French Home
Country land zones are allowed to use their full movement range to move out of France,
potentially onto naval transports. If they cannot, they are eliminated.

Vichy Army:
Place 3 Infantry, 1 Artillery and 1 Fighter in Southern France.

French Navy:
For each French naval unit in port in French Home Country or in Enemy captured French land
zones, roll a D12:

   Dice #      Action
     1-7       Scuttled; Remove from game.
               Replace with Vichy equivalent; Move to sea zone M1. No further movement this
     8-10
               turn. (Eligible Surface Ships may go in port in Southern France).
               Joins the Axis; Replace with German equivalent (Japanese equivalent if the
    11-12
               naval unit is in the Indian or Pacific Ocean).

For each other French naval unit on the board (including in port), roll a D12:

   Dice #      Action
     1-3       Joins the Allies; Unit becomes Free French.
     4-7       Scuttled; Remove from game.
               Replace with Vichy equivalent; Move to sea zone M1. No further movement this
    8-10
               turn. (Eligible Surface Ships may go in port in Southern France).



                                                                                                   32
   Dice #      Action
               Joins the Axis; Replace with German equivalent (Japanese equivalent if the
    11-12
               naval unit is in, or in port adjacent to, the Indian or Pacific Ocean).

If a naval transport containing cargo joins Vichy or the Axis, the cargo joins the corresponding
Vichy or Axis nation along with the naval transport.

Ships are replaced in their current state regarding damage and/or skeleton crew. The Axis
players can decide to let some or all of their newly acquired ships be placed immediately in a
sea zone adjacent to, or in port at, their Home Country, representing these ships having sailed
under the French Flag. This must be decided after the rolling for all French naval units has
ended. Any ships moved in this way cannot move further this turn.

For ships on the French build queue, roll a D12:

   Dice #     Action
     1-7      Scuttled; Remove from game.
    8-10      Replace with Vichy equivalent on the build queue.
   11-12      Replace with German equivalent on the build queue.

Germany can Lend-lease IPPs to advance Vichy ships on the build queue.

French Territories:
French Guiana and St. Pierre Island become Free French. For any other French o shore
territory (all land zones marked with a French roundel on the map besides Corsica that are not
part of French Home Country), roll a D12:

   Dice #     Action
     1-6      Becomes Free French.
    7-12      Becomes Vichy.

With the placement of each roundel, that faction takes possession of the land zone and
French units within. If the land zone went Vichy, any French units within may be replaced by
corresponding Vichy units (exception: the four land zones in 1. below, which will be replaced
with Japanese sculpts if a 7-12 is rolled). Allies’ forces in Vichy land zones are allowed to use
their full movement range to move to a Friendly-possessed land zone, potentially onto naval
transports. If they cannot, they are eliminated.

The following land zones are combined for this determination into one die roll for each
grouping:

1. Annam Tonkin, Cochinchina, Gambier Islands and New Caledonia*
2. French Somaliland, Madagascar and Réunion
3. Northern-, Western- and Southern Algeria
4. Mauritania, French Guinea, French Sudan and Ivory Coast
5. Dahomey, Niger, Chad, Cameroon and Oubangui-Chari

* Annam Tonkin, Cochinchina, Gambier Islands and New Caledonia will become Japanese-
possessed if a 7-12 is rolled (replacing French units with Japanese equivalents).




                                                                                                33
                                                                      ff
If a land zone contains a Naval Facility with ships in port, move these ships out of the Naval
Facility.

Vichy may non-combat move its units and make a recruitment roll in in the same Player Turn it
is created.

French Units on MAP and in Aligned Major Powers’ Land Zones:
All French units on MAP and any French land units or aircraft in Aligned Major Powers’ land
zones become Free French.

French Aligned Minor Powers:
All French Aligned Minor Powers (e.g. Abyssinia) Align with Free France. All land zones that
France has captured become Free French-possessed. (French-controlled Minor Powers, refer
to 5.7).



4.11.3 Vichy Income and Diplomacy
Vichy is an Axis Minor Power controlled by Germany. As long as controlled, Vichy gets
recruitment rolls (refer to 12.7). When collecting income each turn, the German player decides
how income from Vichy-possessed land zones should be allocated. Either:
• Added to the German income (to be spent as Germany) or
• Collected by Vichy (to be spent as Vichy)
Vichy is at war with Free France. Vichy can not attack other nations. If attacked by anyone
besides Free France, Vichy will Align with Germany after the Attacker’s Combat Phase.
(Exception: When Great Britain uses its “Operation Catapult” special ability.) If Vichy Aligns
with Germany, IPP collected by Vichy is added to the German income. Axis Powers may not
attack Vichy.



4.11.4 Internal French Con ict
Vichy and Free France are in an internal French con ict. They may attack each other’s units
and land zones. A Free French attack on Vichy does not make Vichy Align with Germany.

If Vichy attacks a Free French land zone containing units not from Free France, the non-French
units do not participate in the combat. If Vichy succeeds in conquering the land zone, the non-
French units are moved to the nearest Friendly-possessed land zone, regardless of distance.

If Vichy attacks Free France in a sea zone containing other Allies’ naval units, the non-French
units do not participate in the combat but stay in the zone.




                                                                                                 34
                       fl




                                       fl
                             Chapter 5 - War and Peace

     The game begins with all Major Powers being neutral (refer to 4.4).

     5.1 Declaration of War (DoW):
     Players can declare war on other Major Powers at any time, even during other players’ turns
     (exception: Strategic Naval Movement (refer to 11.4)). Sequentially, the Attacking player and
     members of its Alliance get to the declare war rst, if they so choose.

     Example: It is the German Player’s Turn. The Soviet player wants to declare war on Germany.
     Before doing so, he asks the German, Japanese and Italian player if they wants to declare war.
     They decline. Subsequently, the Soviet player declares war on Germany.

     When a Major Power has war declared upon it by another Major Power, it immediately jumps
     to its Full Production income, plus any income from annexed or
     captured land zones. When Great Britain goes to war with a
     Major Power, both ANZAC and FEC’s income increase to Full         Wartime Income
     Production. A DoW by a Minor Power does not trigger an income
     increase.                                                       USSR                19

     Players can issue DoW’s on Minor Powers only by means of a            Great Britain       25
     land unit combat movement against that nation. Nations have           France              18
     speci c requirements for declaring war. Some nations cannot
     issue a DoW until reaching a certain income level, called Wartime     USA                 63
     Income. You may not declare war on a member of your Alliance.

     Aggressor            DoW on:               Yes/No, Condition
     Axis Major           Other Axis            No.
     Power                Nationalist Spain     No.
     (Germany,
     Japan, Italy)        Any other nation      Yes, anytime.
                          Other Comintern       No.
                          Republican Spain      No.
                                                Yes, once at Wartime Income and if the Allies’
     USSR                                       nation is at Full Production income. 10 IPP
                          Allies’
                                                income decrease if USSR is not at Full
                                                Production income (refer to 5.4).
                          Any other nation      Yes, once at Wartime Income.
                          Other Comintern       No.
                          Chinese warlords      Yes, via combat movement against warlord.
     CCP
                                                Yes, once evolved to Major Power or if that
                          Any other nation      nation has units or possesses a land zone in
                                                Chinese Home Country.
                          Other Allies          No.
                          Chinese warlords or Yes, if CCP previously has been eliminated. Via
     KMT                  Mongolia            combat movement.
                                                Yes, once evolved to Major Power or if that
                          Any other nation      nation has units or possesses a land zone in
                                                Chinese Home Country.


                                                                                                     35
fi




                                         fi
     Aggressor            DoW on:               Yes/No, Condition
                          Other Allies          No.
                          Chinese warlords      No.
                                                Yes, once at Wartime Income and only if that
                                                Axis nation:
                                                • Possesses an Allies’ Major Power's Original
                                                  land zone or
                          Axis Major Powers
                                                • Has sent Lend-lease to a nation which was at
                                                  war with an Allied Major Power or
     Allies’ Major                              • Has successfully interdicted an Allied Lend-
     Power (British                               lease delivery or
                                                • Has declared war on another nation.
     Commonwealth,
                    Axis Minor Powers           Yes, once at Wartime Income.
     France, USA)
                                                Yes, once USA is at Wartime Income and:
                                                • Comintern has declared war on an Allies’ nation
                                                  or
                          Comintern             • USSR Possesses an Originally neutral land
                                                  zone outside its sphere of in uence or
                                                • Comintern Possesses an Allies’ Major Power
                                                  Original land zone.
                                                Yes, once at Wartime Income. 10 IPP penalty for
                          Any other nation      declaring nation and if USA is at peace then USA
                                                su ers a 10 IPP income decrease (refer to 5.4).
                          Other Allies          No.
                          Chinese warlords      No.
                                                Yes, if that Axis nation has declared war on
                          Axis
     Free France                                another nation.

                          Comintern             Yes, if USA is at war with USSR.
                                                Yes. 10 IPP penalty and if USA is at peace then
                          Any other nation      USA suffers a 10 IPP income decrease (refer to
                                                5.4).


     Once nations are at war, they cannot go back to neutrality unless otherwise speci ed (refer to
     6.5 and 6.6). If units from warring nations occupy the same territory, combat is not optional
     unless otherwise speci ed (refer to 9.3.1, 9.4, 10.5, 10.6.1, and 10.7). When Major Powers are
     at war, the following are no longer possible:

     • Lend-lease between members of the Alliances of the two nations.
     • Build railroads into the other nation’s land zones.




                                                                                                  36
ff




              fi




                   fl




                                                                         fi
     5.2 Income Increases:
     Some nations receive income increases up to a maximum of their Full Production on certain
     Calendar Turns and based on actions of other players. If the increase is due to a Calendar
     Turn, roll in the beginning of the Production Phase.

                      Jan. ´37 Jan. ´38 Jan. ´39 Jul. ´39          All Player Turns Thereafter
          USSR           1D6            1D6        1D6    1D12      1D12 until Full Production (46)
     Great Britain                                        1D12      1D12 until Full Production (25)
         France                                           1D12      1D12 until Full Production (18)
          USA                                             1D12      1D12 until Full Production (63)

     Example: It is January, 1939, turn 6. USSR has rolled twice for income increases (once in
     January of 1937 and another in January of 1938) and has increased Soviet income by 11, for a
     total of 15 IPP. Again, USSR rolls a D6 for income increase this Player Turn at the beginning of
     the Production Phase and rolls a “4”. Now it has achieved its Wartime Income and may declare
     war. If USSR remains neutral, at the end of this Player Turn, USSR will receive 19 IPP. Next
     Player Turn, USSR will begin rolling a D12 every Player Turn for income increases until its
     income reaches its Full Production (46 IPP).

     Example: USSR has declared war on Germany. Soviet income is 30 IPP. Germany captures 2
     Soviet land zones worth 3 IPP, decreasing Soviet income to 27 IPP. Subsequently, Soviet “Full
     Production” is now reduced by 3 to 43 IPP, and the Soviet player rolls income increase rolls
     until this income level is reached.

     If the income increase is due to actions by other players, roll for these immediately. Thus, a
     player may be able to take income-dependent actions like declaring war even on another
     player’s turn.


     5.3 Wartime Bonus Income:
     A nation may be eligible for bonus income based on certain circumstances listed on its
     national reference sheet. Note: Some instances of Wartime Bonus Income are eligible when a
     nation is at peace, but most instances require nations to be at war. Bonus income can be
     tracked on the IPP Tracking Chart.


     5.4 Declaration of War Penalty:
     If Great Britain, France, Free France or USA declare war on a neutral nation, it must pay a one-
     time 10 IPP penalty. Additionally, USA, if at peace, su ers a 10 IPP income decrease each
     time it or an Allies’ nation declares war on a neutral nation.

     USSR su ers a 10 IPP income decrease if it declares war on an Allies’ nation if USSR income
     is less than Full Production.


     5.5 Monroe Doctrine:
     USA has a special doctrine in place known as the “Monroe Doctrine” which
     claims all of North and South America as o -limits to foreign occupation.

     The “Monroe Doctrine” allows USA to attack Comintern units that are
     bordering North or South American land zones without declaring war and
     regardless of its own income level or income determined movement restrictions. USA is also


                                                                                                      37
ff




                                   ff




                                              ff
allowed to attack Comintern-occupied land zones in North and South America. Comintern
violations of the “Monroe Doctrine” do not trigger USA income increases.

If an Axis Major Power attacks a land zone in North or South America, or has a Surface Ship
end its movement within 3 sea zones of USA Home Country, USA considers it a declaration of
war. Sea zones a ected by this are depicted by a small “Monroe” symbol on the map.


5.6 Annexations:
Some Major Powers can Annex certain land zones according to historical events. Annexation
is done by combat moving a land unit into the land zone. No combat occurs.

Land Zone          Major Power       Condition - When?
                                     Neutral Units Present?
                                     Consequence for Allies’ Income
Albania            Italy             Anytime
                                     Remove
                                     None
Estonia            USSR              Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (January, 1939 or later)
                                     Remove
                                     None
Latvia             USSR              Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (January, 1939 or later)
                                     Remove
                                     None
Lithuania          USSR              Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (January, 1939 or later)
                                     Remove
                                     None
Bessarabia         USSR              Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (January, 1939 or later)
(Romania)                            Remove
                                     None
Austria {A}        Germany           Anytime, one per Player Turn of {A-B-S}
                                     Replace with German equivalent
                                     Great Britain+1, France+1
Bohemia          Germany             Anytime, one per Player Turn of {A-B-S}
(Czechoslovakia)                     Replace with German equivalent
{B}                                  Great Britain+1, France+1
Slovakia         Germany             Anytime, one per Player Turn of {A-B-S}
(Czechoslovakia)                     Replace with German equivalent
{S}                                  Great Britain+1, France+1



5.7 Defeating a Nation
Player nations have di erent surrender conditions. If a nation surrenders:

• Its units are removed from the board. (Exception: France and Vichy, refer to 4.11).
• Its controlled Minor Powers become controlled by another member of their Alliance.
• Its possessed land zones are no longer possessed, but may be captured via combat
  movement by a land unit.
• It may not have land zones liberated (refer to 10.10.1).

Nation             Surrender Condition
Germany            Germany never surrenders.
CCP                CCP never surrenders.



                                                                                         38
   ff




          ff
Nation             Surrender Condition
USSR               USSR never surrenders.
Japan              If Tokyo is Enemy-possessed at the end of the Japanese Player Turn.
                   If London, Cape Town, Ottawa, Sydney and Calcutta are all Enemy-
Great Britain      possessed at the end of the British Commonwealth Player Turn.
FEC                If Great Britain surrenders.
                   If Sydney and all of New Zealand are Enemy-possessed at the end of
ANZAC              the ANZAC Player Turn.
                   If either:
                   (a) Paris is Enemy-possessed or
France             (b) all land zones surrounding Paris are Enemy-possessed.

                   Note that France only surrenders once per game.
Free France        Free France never surrenders.
                   If Paris is liberated. All remaining Vichy units and land zones
Vichy              subsequently join France.
Italy              If Rome is Enemy-possessed at the end of the Italian Player Turn.
KMT                If KMT Possesses no land zones.
USA                If Washington, D.C., Chicago, New York and San Francisco are all
                   Enemy-possessed at the end of the USA Player Turn.

Other nations / neutrals do not surrender. They may be eliminated when they no longer have
land zones or units, or may be absorbed through Alignment.

If a nation surrenders, the Attacking player rolls a D12 for each ship of the surrendering nation
still on the build queue:

        Dice #      Event
         1-7        Scuttled; Remove from game.
         8-12       Captured by Attacking player.

If a ship under construction is captured by the Attacking player, he may continue building it.




                                                                                                 39
                      Chapter 6 - Pacts and Truces

6.1 Signing a Treaty:
Players may sign a treaty at any point in time, even during another player’s turn.


6.2 Terminating a Treaty:
Players may terminate a treaty at any point in time, even during another player’s turn, but
some treaties require payment of IPPs to do so. Once terminated, a treaty may not be signed
again.


6.3 Japanese-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact:
The Japanese and Soviet players may sign a non-aggression pact.

Japanese-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact
                       Neither side will attack the other or engage in border clashes.
Non-Aggression         Neither side will Lend-lease to a nation the other is at war with.
Termination            Either side may break the treaty by paying 5 IPP.



6.4 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact:
The German and Soviet players may sign the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact in January, 1939 or
later.

The trade (bonus income / technology) provided by the treaty will be given to the players at the
end of each Calendar Turn, after they possess all Originally Polish-possessed land zones.

Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
Non-Aggression                      Neither side will attack the other.
                                    Germany and USSR agree to mutually bene cial trade.
                                    Germany gets 5 IPP bonus income per Player Turn.
Trade                               USSR gets 3 IPP bonus income + 1 technology roll per
                                    Player Turn.
                                    Baltic-White Sea Canal: One German submarine may use
                                    the Baltic-White Sea Canal per Player Turn.
Right of passage
                                    Northern Sea Route: One German naval unit may use the
                                    Northern Sea Route per Player Turn.




                                                                                             40
                               fi
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
                     Enables USSR to attack/Annex certain land zones before
                     reaching Wartime Income:

                     Baltic states:
                     USSR may Annex the Baltic states (Lithuania, Latvia and
                     Estonia).

                     Poland:
                     USSR may attack Podlachia, Lubelskie & East Poland.
                     USSR may not attack further into Poland.

                     Regardless of USSR actions, the Allies’ income increases
                     when Germany attacks Poland are reduced to 1D12 instead
                     of 2D12.

                     Starting the turn after Germany Possesses Warsaw,
                     Germany may attack Podlachia, Lubelskie & East Poland if
                     they are still British- or Polish-possessed. This does not
                     trigger a Soviet D12 income increase.

                     Finland:
                     USSR may attack Viipuri Province. If attacked, Finland
Sphere of In uence   becomes a neutral Minor Power controlled by Germany
                     (refer to 4.7). As long as controlled and at war with USSR,
                     Finland gets recruitment rolls and may receive Lend-lease
                     from the Axis and the Allies. The Soviet player may sign a
                     truce with Finland (refer to 6.5).

                     Note that USSR may attack further into Finland after USSR
                     reaches Wartime Income without breaking the Molotov-
                     Ribbentrop Pact.

                     Bulgaria & Hungary:
                     USSR may not attack Bulgaria or Hungary.

                     Romania:
                     USSR may Annex Bessarabia. USSR may not attack further
                     into Central Romania. If USSR Annexes Bessarabia, the rest
                     of Romania becomes a neutral Minor Power controlled by
                     Germany. As long as controlled, Romania gets recruitment
                     rolls. Romania Aligns with Germany when Germany and
                     USSR are at war. Note: Germany does not get +3 Wartime
                     Bonus Income from Romania as long as Bessarabia is
                     possessed by USSR.
                     France and Germany may engage in border clashes if
Border Clashes       Germany has attacked Poland (refer to 10.5.2).

Termination          Either side may break the treaty at any time.




                                                                                   41
fl
     6.5 Moscow Peace Treaty
     Only applicable if the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact has been signed and Viipuri Province is the
     only Soviet-possessed Finnish land zone.

     Moscow Peace Treaty
                                    Immediately after capturing Viipuri Province, the Soviet
                                    player can unilaterally sign a peace treaty with Finland.
     Molotov-Ribbentrop
     Pact and the Winter War Being at peace, Finland does not get recruitment rolls and
                                    may not receive Lend-lease from either the Axis or the Allies.
     Termination                    The Soviet player may break the treaty by paying 5 IPP.

     Note the di erent Finnish Alignment conditions (refer to 4.7).


     6.6 Chinese Truce
     When a foreign Major Power declares war on China, CCP and KMT may agree to a truce. This
     must be decided immediately at the end of the Attacker’a Combat Phase.

     Chinese Truce
                                    Neither faction may attack the other faction.
     Non-aggression                 If one faction retakes a land zone in Chinese Home Country
                                    from a foreign nation, that faction gains Possession.
                                    Both factions may move freely within each other’s land
     Cooperation                    zones, defending together as if Aligned.
                                    Either side may break the truce during their Combat Phase.
                                    The faction that breaks the truce is able to move some, or
                                    all, of its units out of a zone it is sharing with the other
                                    faction, during the Combat Movement Phase. If either
                                    faction evolves to Major Power, the truce is automatically
     Termination                    terminated. In both cases, combat is then resolved for any
                                    land zones that contain units from both factions. If KMT
                                    breaks the truce and has units potentially su ering low
                                    morale (refer to 15.7) in shared land zones, these are
                                    eliminated if they roll a 10 or more.

     Note that If one of the Chinese factions has evolved to Major Power, the Chinese Truce can no
     longer be signed.




                                                                                                     42
ff




                                    ff
                            Chapter 7 - Order of Play

7.1 Order of Nations:
Nations perform their Player Turns in the following order:

 1 - Germany (Vichy & Nationalist Spain)
 2 - CCP
 3 - USSR (Mongolia & Republican Spain)
 4 - Japan (Siam)
 5 - British Commonwealth
 6 - France (Abyssinia) / Free France
 7 - Italy
 8 - KMT
 9 - USA

Controlled Minor Powers (listed in parentheses) share Player Turns with their Controlling Major
Power. They may not attack together.

The constituents of the British Commonwealth (Great Britain, FEC and ANZAC) share Player
Turns, and move/attack/defend together as if one nation.



7.2 Continuous Play:
Experienced players may want to play overlapping each other to a certain extent.

Examples of overlapping gameplay:

• CCP may start at the same time as Germany.
• If USSR plays his Asian theatre rst (or is neutral towards Japan), Japan may begin right
  after CCP.
• If Italy is not attacking the Allies, it may begin right after Great Britain.
• KMT may begin right after Japan.
For overlapping gameplay to work, all players have to be experienced, and as mistakes are
sure to be made, it is mandatory to have a high degree of gentlemen-like sportsmanship and
an exemplary code of conduct.

This mode provides for a greatly reduced timespan of play in the early game and can be very
gratifying, but potentially stressful!




                                                                                             43
                    fi
     7.3 Phases of a Player Turn:
     Players go through the following phases during their Player Turn. Unless otherwise speci ed,
     players can perform the actions within a Player Turn phase listed in any order.



      Order of a Player Turn                           What Players Do
                                  • Income increases.
                                  • Developing technology.
                  1.              • Purchase units and facilities.
                                  • Pay to move units along build queue.
         Production Phase         • Alignments.
                                  • Start repairs on damaged Capital Ships and facilities.
                                  • Declare Lend-lease.
                                  • Make diplomacy rolls.
                                  • Declare combats and move units accordingly.
                  2.              • Designate units as screening forces.
                                  • Designate Surface Warships as escorts.
        Combat Movement           • Designate Battlecruisers as raiders.
            Phase                 • Assign aircraft on Maritime Air Patrol.
                                  • Declare convoy raiding.
                                  • Resolve combats that were declared in the Combat
                  3.                Movement Phase. The Attacking player decides in which
                                    order the combats are resolved.
          Combat Phase            • Conduct blitzing.
                                  • Move aircraft returning from combat.

                                  • Move units that did not move during the Combat
                  4.                 Movement Phase.
                         • Move aircraft returning from Maritime Air Patrol.
     Non-combat Movement • Strategic Naval Movement.
            Phase        • Strategic Rail Movement.
                         • Designate ships in port.
                                  • Place units and facilities from build queue place units box.
                                  • Finish repairs on Capital Ships and facilities.
                                  • Upgrade units.
                  5.              • Deliver Lend-lease (make interdiction rolls if applicable).
                                  • Roll for captured ships in port.
        Place Units Phase         • Make recruitment rolls.
                                  • Make in uence rolls.
                                  • Collect income.
                                  • Remove IPP loss trackers on convoy lines.




                                                                                                   44
fl




                                                                                fi
                       Chapter 8 - Production Phase

8.1 Income Increases:
Eligible nations roll for income increases (refer to 5.2).


8.2 Developing Technology
The technology chart lists the technologies that
can be developed and the die roll needed to pass
each stage of development. Once a nation’s
marker reaches completion, the technology is
immediately available for use.
Major Factories are the source of your
technological development capacity. For every
undamaged possessed Major Factory, you get 1
technology die roll. You can only roll for a
technology once per Calendar Turn. Damaged
factories provide no rolls.

• USA can not develop technology until it reaches 10 IPP income.
• Until USSR reaches 15 IPP income, it can only develop technology via its Rapid
  Industrialization strategic objective or the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
• Stage III cannot be developed before July, 1939.
• Units that become available after developing technology cannot be Lend-leased.


8.2.1 Technologies
Advanced Mechanized Infantry represents improvements in mechanized infantry doctrine
and weaponry. Advanced Mechanized Infantry technology allows a nation to build Advanced
Mechanized Infantry units.

Advanced Mechanized Infantry units are Mechanized Infantry for all purposes except as
follows:
• Improved attack and defense values.
• May pair 2:1 with blitzing with armor (e.g. 2 Advanced Mechanized Infantry may accompany
   one blitzing armor).
                                            Attack       Defense Movement       Price
Advanced Mechanized Infantry                    4            5           2      4 IPP

After developing Advanced Mechanized Infantry technology, Germany is able to build a
special kind of Advanced Mechanized Infantry unit: Panzergrenadiers.


Advanced Artillery represents improved artillery doctrine and advanced artillery weapons.
Advanced Artillery technology allows a nation to build Advanced Artillery units.

Advanced Artillery units are Artillery for all purposes except as follows:
• Improved attack and defense values.
• May make an attrition attack on an adjacent land zone at “2”.



                                                                                            45
                                                  Attack   Defense     Movement         Price
     Advanced Artillery                             4         4             1            4 IPP

     Self-propelled Advanced Artillery              4         4             2            5 IPP

     After developing Advanced Artillery technology, USSR is able to build a special kind of Artillery
     unit: Katyusha Rocket Artillery.


     Radar represents advanced naval and air detection capabilities. As soon as a nation develops
     Radar technology, it gets the following advantages:

     • +1 modi er to battlecruiser and convoy rolls (refer to 9.4.4 and 10.9).
     • Bases and major Naval Facilities may scramble an unlimited number of units.
     • Aircraft gain +1 interception (refer to 10.6.3).
     • Facilities’ inherent anti-aircraft may shoot at Strategic Rockets.
     • Fighters able to intercept and scramble from Heavy Fleet Carriers.

     Anti-submarine Warfare (ASW) represents improvements to naval vessels, aircraft and
     merchantmen to detect and destroy submarines. As soon as a nation develops ASW
     technology, it gets the following advantages:
     • Defending convoys gain +1 to their convoy roll (refer to 10.9).
     • When submarines raid a convoy line of a nation with ASW technology, the Defender gets a
        defensive roll at “2” against each raiding submarine. Roll each one separately.
     • In regular combat all Naval Transports defend at “1” against attacking submarines.
     • Seaplanes on MAP get +2 attack bonus against submarines.


     Improved Factories represents modern mass production. As soon as a nation develops
     Improved Factories technology, it gets the following advantages:
     • Minor Factories can produce 2 units per Player Turn instead of 1.
     • Medium Factories can produce 5 units per Player Turn instead of 3.
     • Major Factories can produce 8 units per Player Turn instead of 5.
     • Minor Shipyards can produce 2 units per Player Turn instead of 1.
     • Major Shipyards can produce 8 units per Player Turn instead of 5.
     A captured improved factory/shipyard gives no bene t to the captor.
     After developing Improved Factories technology, USSR is able to build a special kind of
     Medium Armor unit: T-34.


     Improved Construction represents improved building construction. As soon as a nation
     develops Improved Construction technology, it gets the following advantages:
     • All facilities, facility upgrades and naval units cost -1 IPP per stage
       or
     • A player may pay to condense the rst two construction stages to a single stage: Thus a
       facility that costs 6/6/6 could be built for 12/6.

     • Minor Factories reduce damage from strategic bombing by 1 per Player Turn.
     • Medium Factories reduce damage from strategic bombing by 3 per Player Turn.
     • Major Factories reduce damage from strategic bombing by 5 per Player Turn.
     • Cities reduce damage from strategic bombing by 5 per Player Turn.



                                                                                                   46
fi




                           fi




                                             fi
          Example: A German Strategic Rocket and a Strategic Bomber strategically bomb a Soviet
          Major Factory doing a total of 10 IPP damage. USSR has developed Improved Construction
          technology, so it only has to su er 5 IPP damage to the factory.


          Airborne Doctrine represents improved tactics and equipment used in airborne assaults. As
          soon as a nation develops Airborne Doctrine technology, it gets the following advantages:
          • Able to build Heavy Air Transport units.
          • Improved combat values for its Airborne Infantry units.
          • Enemy cities no longer have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery versus airborne assaults (refer to
             10.6.1).
          • Enemy Forti cations’ rst strike rolls cannot target airborne assaulting airborne infantry nor
             their transporting aircraft (refer to 10.6.1).

          Heavy Air Transports are Air Transports for all purposes except as follows:
          • Able to carry 2 airborne infantry into an airborne assault.
          • Able to carry 1 Artillery, 1 Anti-aircraft Artillery or 1 infantry-class unit in non-combat
            movement.
                                                 Attack          Defense      Movement           Price
          Heavy Air Transports                     N/A                N/A           6             9 IPP

          Note the di erence in capacity in combat movement versus non-combat movement.

          Elite Airborne Infantry are Airborne Infantry for all purposes except as follows:
          • Improved attack and defense values.
          • Does not have higher attack values in the rst round of combat if dropped in an airborne
             assault.

                                                 Attack          Defense      Movement           Price
          Elite Airborne Infantry                    3                 3            1             3 IPP

          Note: When a nation develops Airborne Doctrine technology, all its existing
          Airborne Infantry automatically become Elite Airborne Infantry. If Lend-leasing an Elite Airborne
          Infantry, the receiving nation only receives Airborne Infantry (unless the receiving nation
          Possesses Airborne Doctrine technology). If Lend-leasing an Airborne Infantry to a nation that
          has Airborne Doctrine technology, the unit automatically becomes Elite Airborne Infantry upon
          delivery.


          Amphibious Doctrine represents improved tactics and equipment used in amphibious
          assaults. As soon as a nation develops Amphibious Doctrine technology, it gets the following
          advantages:
          • Its infantry-class units do not su er double casualties in the rst combat round when
            amphibiously assaulting.
          • Able to build Attack Naval Transport units.
          Attack Naval Transports are Naval Transports for all purposes except as follows:
          • Defense value of “1”.
          • Marines gain +1 attack when amphibiously assaulting from an Attack Naval Transport.
          • All land units can participate in an amphibious assault from the rst combat round.




                                                                                                          47
ff




     fi




                   fi




                            ff




                                 ff




                                        fi




                                                            fi




                                                                 fi
                                           Attack       Defense       Movement          Price
     Attack Naval Transports                    N/A          1              2           7 IPP



     Heavy Armor represents improvements in armored warfare doctrine and tank repower,
     armor, and performance. Heavy Armor technology allows a nation to build Heavy Armor units.

     Heavy Armor is Medium Armor for all purposes except as follows:
     • Improved attack and defense values
     • Target Selection at “1” (versus vehicle-class units).

                                           Attack       Defense       Movement          Price
     Heavy Armor                                8 [1]      7 [1]            2           7 IPP

     After developing Heavy Armor technology, Germany is able to build a special kind of Heavy
     Armor unit: Tiger I.


     Jet Fighters represents rst generation jet engine ghters. Jet Fighters technology allows a
     nation to build Jet Fighter units.

     Jet Fighters are Fighters for all purposes except as follows:
     • Improved attack and defense values.
     • Interception value of “5”.

                                           Attack       Defense       Movement          Price
     Jet Fighters                               8 (5)      8 (5)            4           11 IPP



     Long-range Aircraft represents improvements to aircraft design. As soon as a nation
     develops Long-range Aircraft technology, it gets the following advantages:
     • Aircraft gain +1 movement.
     • Medium Bombers gain +1 MAP range.
     • Seaplanes gain +1 MAP range if starting from a Seaplane Base.
     • Defending convoys gain +1 to their convoy roll (refer to 10.9).
     Note: When a nation develops Long-range Aircraft technology, all its existing aircraft are
     automatically upgraded.


     Advanced Submarines represents improvements in submarine doctrine and technology. As
     soon as a nation develops Advanced Submarines technology, it gets the following
     advantages:

     • Wolfpacks: Raiding submarines (all types) gain +1 to their convoy roll if more than one
       submarine is raiding in the sea zone.
     • Submarines double their interdiction values (refer to 12.5).
     • Able to build Advanced Submarine units.
     Advanced Submarines are Submarines for all purposes except as follows:
     • +4 modi er to their convoy roll.


                                                                                                  48
fi




                fi




                                           fi




                                                                       fi
• Advanced Submarines can only be attacked by aircraft on Maritime Air Patrol (not with a
  paired Destroyer).

Units defend against Advanced Submarines normally.


                                         Attack      Defense       Movement           Price
Advanced Submarines                       4 [1]         4 [1]            3            7 IPP



Large Ship Construction represents the ability to construct very large Capital Ships. Large
Ship Construction technology allows a nation to build Heavy Battleships and Heavy Fleet
Carriers.

Heavy Battleships are Battleships for all purposes except as follows:
• Improved attack, defense and movement values.
• Require 3 hits to sink.
Heavy Fleet Carriers are Fleet Carriers for all purposes except as follows:
• Carry 3 Fighters/Tactical Bombers or
  1 Medium Bomber and 1 Fighter or 1 Tactical Bomber.
• Fighters able to intercept and scramble if Radar technology developed.


                                         Attack     Defense        Movement           Price
Heavy Battleships                          10           10               3            7/7/7

Heavy Fleet Carriers                      N/A            2               3            6/6/6



Improved Logistics represents new innovations and large-scale infrastructure projects. As
soon as a nation develops Improved Logistics technology, it gets the following advantages:
• +1 Strategic Rail Movement capacity in all regions.
• Able to Strategic Rail Move units across di erent railroad gauges (refer to 1.6).
• +1 Supply Path range.
• +2 Strategic Naval Movement.
• +1 Strategic Naval Movement range.
• May move its Factories in Home Country. It takes 1 Strategic Rail move to move a Minor or
  Medium Factory and 2 Strategic Rail moves to move a Major Factory. The factory cannot
  produce any units or technology, or be upgraded or repaired the Player Turn it moves. It
  moves in whatever state of damage it has su ered. It must remain inside Home Country.
• May make one anti-diplomacy die roll per turn. On a “2” or less drop another Major Power’s
  diplomacy status for a nation to stage 0.


Heavy Strategic Bombers represents improvements in bombing doctrine and large bombers
with long range. As soon as a nation develops Heavy Strategic Bombers technology, it gets
the following advantages:

• Enemy facilities’ inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery defends at “2” instead of “3”.
• Able to conduct carpet bombing (refer to 10.6.5).
• Able to build Heavy Strategic Bomber units.
Heavy Strategic Bombers are Strategic Bombers for all purposes except as follows:


                                                                                              49
                               ff




                                    ff
• Improved attack, defense and movement values; 3D6 damage in strategic bombing and
  carpet-bombing with ve dice at “2”.
• Interception value of “2”.

                                      Attack                 Defense Movement Price

      Heavy       3D6 strategic bombing damage
                                                                3 (2)          7         11 IPP
Strategic Bombers  5D12 carpet bombing at “2”

After developing Heavy Strategic Bombers technology, USA is able to build a special kind of
Heavy Strategic Bomber unit: B-29.


Strategic Rockets represents long-range weapons designed to strike facilities and cities.
Strategic Rockets technology allows a nation to build Strategic Rocket units, maximum of two
per Player Turn. Strategic Rockets have no attack or defense value in normal combat and
cannot be taken as casualties. They can be moved like any other unit. They are eliminated if
they are ever alone in a zone with an Enemy land unit.

A Strategic Rocket can only be used once, and can be red at any target that can be
strategically bombed. The Strategic Rocket has a range of 3 and does 1D6 damage. A
Strategic Rocket may not be red over nations they are not at war with or Aligned with.


                                      Attack                Defense Movement Price
Strategic Rockets        1D6 strategic bombing damage           N/A      1 (range: 3)    3 IPP



8.3 Purchase Units and Facilities:
Some ships and facilities require more than one Player Turn to build. These are listed as per-
turn costs. (e.g. a Heavy Cruiser listed as 5/5 costs 10 IPP and take two Player Turns to build).



8.3.1 Units
Global War 1936 has over 50 units available for players. Refer to 13.1 for a list of all possible
units and their costs. Nations can only buy what is on their national reference sheet.

For units requiring a factory to be built, there must be factory capacity available. Once units
are paid for they are placed in the place units box in the build queue. They must be placed on
the map in the Place Units Phase later in the turn sequence at an eligible location.

Some units are not available from the beginning of the game, but become available in later
turns:
                                          Germany                       Other Nations
Mechanized Infantry                       July, 1938                     January, 1940
Tank Destroyers                           July, 1938                     January, 1940
Medium Armor                              July, 1938                     January, 1940
Strategic Bombers                         July, 1938                     January, 1940




                                                                                                  50
        fi




                fi




                                            fi
8.3.2 Facilities:
When building facilities, place a facility marker on the map with an “under construction”
marker beneath to signify where it is being built. Place an identical marker on the build queue.

A facility under construction may be strategically bombed (exception: Forti cations (refer to
13.2.6)). A facility under construction has no inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery. It may take up to
three damage. If it takes more damage it is pushed back one stage in the build queue. It is
removed from the build queue once it is pushed past its starting point. Damage must be
repaired before construction can resume.

Example: A Major Factory under construction at stage 2 su ers 5 damage by strategic
bombing. Consequently, it is moved back to stage 3, with 2 in damage. Had it su ered 6 in
damage, it would have been removed from the build queue altogether.



8.4 Purchase Unit and Facility Upgrades:
Some units and facilities can be upgraded. After purchasing an upgrade, place the new
upgraded sculpt in the place units box in the build queue and replace the old unit/facility in the
Place Units Phase.

Players can upgrade units and facilities that were used in the same Player Turn. To upgrade to
a unit or facility, players need to be able to build that particular type.

• Militia can be upgraded to regular Infantry for 2 IPP or via a lend-leased Militia upgrade, up
  to a maximum of two units per Player Turn.
• Regular, Colonial and DAK infantry can be upgraded to Motorized Infantry for 1 IPP, up to a
  maximum of two units per Player Turn.



8.5 Alignments:
Eligible nations may Align other nations (refer to 4.7).



8.6 Start Repairing Capital Ships, Cities and Facilities:
Cities and facilities may be damaged via strategic bombing (refer to 10.6.2). Damage is
represented by a damage marker. Nations begin repairing cities and facilities during the
Production Phase. This repair costs 1 IPP per damage point repaired. The repair is nished in
the Place Units Phase of the same Player Turn.

Damaged cities can only be repaired as long as their maximum damaged has not been
reached (refer to 10.6.2).

Capital Ships (Fleet Carriers, Heavy Fleet Carriers, Battleships, and Heavy Battleships) take
multiple hits to destroy. Damage is represented by a damage marker. To repair damage, a ship
must either be in a sea zone adjacent to, or in port at, a friendly dockyard or shipyard. Nations
begin repairing Capital Ships during the Production Phase. This repair costs nothing, but
consumes 1 repair slot per repair (refer to 13.2.4 and 13.2.5). Two damage points can be
repaired in a single Player Turn (e.g., Heavy Battleships with two damage points), but this uses
two repair slots. The repair is nished in the Place Units Phase of the same Player Turn. On the
Player Turn the ship is being repaired, it may take no action other than optionally moving in
port to the dockyard or shipyard conducting the repair.




                                                                                                     51
                 fi




                                                ff




                                                                 fi




                                                                       ff




                                                                            fi
8.7 Declare Lend-lease:
Major Powers may send Lend-lease to other nations. For each individual receiving nation, a
player may Lend-lease either:

• IPP for one full facility repair (performed in the receiving nation's Player Turn)
   or
• One base or military unit produced speci cally for the purpose of lending
  or
• One Militia upgrade
A player may Lend-lease to multiple receiving nations in a Player Turn, but only one Lend-
lease per nation per Player Turn. Recipient of the Lend-lease has to be speci ed. Starting or
advancing construction of multi-turn units which will be Lend-leased at a future time does not
count against this limit. Units that become available after developing technology cannot be
Lend-leased. The Lend-lease will be delivered in the Place Units Phase.


Lend-lease Conditions
Each Major Power has its own conditions for Lend-lease. It is not possible to send Lend-lease
to a nation that has attempted interdiction or is at war with a member of your Alliance.


    Sender              Recipient          Allowed, Condition
                   Spanish Nationalists Yes (+1 Supply Path range)
   Germany                 Vichy           Yes
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power

                         Any nation        Yes, once CCP has evolved to Major Power and
        CCP                                if recipient is at war with Major Power
                   Spanish Republicans Yes
                            CCP            Yes
        USSR
                        Allies’ / Axis     No
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power
                    Dadao Government       Yes
        Japan
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power
                       ANZAC / FEC         No

       Great             Abyssinia         No
       Britain       Spanish Factions      Yes, but only 1 Allies’ sender per Calendar Turn
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power
                  ANZAC / Great Britain No
        FEC              Abyssinia         No
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power
                    Great Britain / FEC    No
    ANZAC                Abyssinia         No
                     Any other nation      Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power


                                                                                              52
                             fi




                                                                   fi
    Sender                     Recipient           Allowed, Condition
                            Spanish Factions       Yes, but only 1 Allies’ sender per Calendar Turn
    France
                            Any other nation       Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power
 Free France                   Any nation          No
                          Spanish Nationalists Yes
               Italy
                            Any other nation       Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power

                               Any nation          Yes, once KMT has evolved to Major Power and
           KMT                                     if recipient is at war with Major Power
                            Spanish Factions       Yes, but only 1 Allies’ sender per Calendar Turn
               USA                                 Yes, if KMT is at war with Major Power or
    at 15 IPP                     KMT              uses Contain Communism special ability (refer to
     income                                        15.8)
                            Any other nation       Yes, if recipient is at war with Major Power



8.8 Diplomacy:
Major Powers can, once at war with another Major Power, conduct diplomacy rolls. The target
for diplomacy are neutral nations. A Supply Path to the target nation’s Home Country is
required. Diplomacy rolls are successful on a “2” or less. All neutral nations begin at stage 0. If
successful, move one stage up. You can only roll for a nation once per Calendar Turn.

Major Factories are the source of your diplomacy capacity. For every undamaged possessed
Major Factory, you get 1 diplomacy die roll. Damaged factories provide no rolls. The maximum
number of nations you can develop diplomatic relationships with is equal the number of Major
Factories you possesses.

Successful diplomacy yields the following accumulative bene ts:

                                                 Stage 1                               Stage 2
                       Able to use Naval Facilities for going in port.        +1 IPP bonus income
                       (Exception: If there are Enemy units already present). per Player Turn.
 Capability
                       Able to trace a Supply Path via its facilities and
                       through its land zones.

To collect the bene ts, a Supply Path is required.

Players may elect to recall their diplomats in the beginning of the Production Phase. If a Player
loses possession of a Major Factory and this drops the number of Major Factories below the
number of diplomatic relationships they have currently developed, they must recall a diplomat
to compensate.

Example: Both Germany and Great Britain are on diplomacy stage 2 for Ireland. Both get +1
IPP bonus income per Player Turn. Due to British naval supremacy in the sea zones around
Ireland, and the di culties in maintaining a Supply Path to collect the bene ts, the German
player decides to recall its diplomats, to try to in uence another nation in the subsequent turn.




                                                                                                      53
    ffi




          fi




                                            fl




                                                           fi




                                                                       fi
               Chapter 9 - Combat Movement Phase

9.1 Declarations:
The Attacking player declares all combats. Types of combats:

• Land combat (refer to 10.5)
• Naval combat (refer to 10.7)
• Artillery attrition attacks (refer to 10.5.3)
• Border clashes (refer to 10.5.2)
• Airborne assaults (refer to 10.6.1)
• Strategic bombing of facilities (refer to 10.6.2)
• Attacking ships in port (refer to 10.6.4)
• Carpet bombing of land units (refer to 10.6.5)
• Amphibious assaults (refer to 10.8)
• Convoy raiding (refer to 10.9)
Requirement to Use Combat Movement When DoW is Possible:
If the Attacking player wants to move into a sea zone that contains units (or through a narrow
crossing with a Coastal Artillery) from another Alliance at peace with him, the Attacking player
must move during the Combat Movement Phase. (Exception: Strategic Naval Movement, refer
to 11.4.2). This is because there is the potential for either the Attacking or Defending players to
declare war during such movement and combat will result. When the Attacking player moves
into such a sea zone, he must announce if his intention is to declare war and engage in naval
combat in the Combat Phase.

If the Attacking player did not declare war, then the Defending player decides how he will
respond:
• Declare war and engage in naval combat in the Combat Phase, or
• Do nothing and maintain neutrality. The Attacking player proceeds with any remaining
    moves.

If a player declares war on the Attacking player during the Combat Movement Phase, the
Attacking player continues the Combat Movement Phase and may bring additional units to
any potential battle, except where a single round of combat is speci ed during the Combat
Movement Phase (refer to 9.4).

This process of the Attacking player announcing his intention followed by the Defending
player’s response occurs upon entering each sea zone which contains units from nations at
peace with the Attacking player.

Example: Great Britain and Germany are not at war. A British eet consisting of a Battleship,
Destroyer and Naval Transport moves into the sea zone where there is a German
Submarine. The German player decides to declare war (refer to 5.1), and attack with the
Submarine.



9.2 Land Combat Movement:
Units cannot combat move into an Enemy-possessed land zone and keep moving unless they
are blitzing (refer to 10.5.1).

Militia can only start and end combat movement in Home Country.




                                                                                                54
                                                  fl




                                                        fi
     9.3 Aircraft Combat Movement:
     Aircraft may:
     • Fly over controlled Minor Powers.
     • Fly over Enemy-possessed land and sea zones containing Enemy units. If there are Enemy
         ghters in the zone, these must be removed by a screening force (refer to 9.4.2).

     Aircraft may not:
     • Fly over nations they are not at war with or Aligned with, except when crossing canals or
        straits.

     At the end of the Combat Movement Phase, every attacking aircraft must have a suitable
     landing spot to return to after combat. Attacks which potentially may eliminate Enemy Fighters
     cannot create shorter ight paths for landing.

     Aircraft starting on Carriers move independently of the Carrier, in the beginning of the Combat
     Movement Phase.

     Example: Italy is neutral towards British Commonwealth and has one Medium Bomber in
     Tobruk. The Italian player wishes to attack Abyssinia, and combat moves the bomber via M8,
     through the Suez Canal, I5, then over Eritrea to participate in the attack. The bomber will still
     have one more movement to land in Eritrea or Italian Somaliland.



     9.3.1 Maritime Air Patrol (MAP):
     MAP is a form of combat movement for aircraft. An aircraft on MAP moves into a sea zone and
     can remain there until it chooses to end its patrol.

     Starting a Patrol:
     Move aircraft into position within MAP range and place a MAP marker underneath.


                                                                   MAP Range with
     Aircraft                           MAP Range
                                                            Long-range Aircraft Technology
     Fighters                                 1                                1
     Jet Fighters                             1                                1
     Tactical Bombers                         1                                1
     Medium Bombers                           1                                2
     Strategic Bombers                       N/A                             N/A
     Heavy Strategic Bombers                 N/A                             N/A
     Seaplanes                                2            2 (3 if starting from Seaplane Base)
     Air Transports                          N/A                             N/A

     On Patrol:
     In its nation’s Combat Phase, an aircraft on MAP may choose to attack Enemy naval units that
     are in its sea zone.

     On Enemy Player Turns, an aircraft on MAP may engage Enemy units entering its sea zone.
     One round of combat occurs between the aircraft on MAP and all the Attacking Player's units,
     during the Combat Movement Phase. Other units may not participate or be taken as
     casualties (exception: paired Destroyers, refer to 9.4). After this single round, surviving units


                                                                                                     55
fi




              fl
may continue their movement, their movement range and abilities are not a ected. Note that if
the aircraft on MAP is a Fighter, a screening force is required to continue moving (refer 9.4.2).
An aircraft on MAP may decline to engage in combat with ships if the opponent has no aircraft
with attack values present. An aircraft that declines combat with moving units allows them to
continue moving, their movement range and abilities are not a ected.

Note that defending submarines may decline combat unless the Attacker has aircraft on MAP.
Aircraft on MAP may be paired 1:1 with Destroyers when attacking submarines.

Example: Germany and Great Britain are at war. A German Submarine combat moves into a
sea zone with a British eet consisting of a Battleship, Destroyer and Naval Transport. The
Submarine chooses to decline combat with the eet and continues moving. Since the British
do not have an aircraft on MAP, the eet does not have the option to engage the Submarine.

Example: Great Britain and Italy are at war. A British Submarine enters a sea zone with an
Italian Tactical Bomber on MAP, as well as a Destroyer. The Italian player could decline to
engage the Submarine and allow it to move to the next sea zone, but decides instead to attack
the Submarine. He could pair the Destroyer with the Tactical Bomber (refer to 9.4), increasing
his chances of hitting the Submarine. Since the Submarine cannot hit aircraft, this would give
the Submarine a target to hit. The Italian player elects to use both the Tactical Bomber and the
Destroyer. Both units get one shot at the Submarine, using their defense values, as he is the
Defender. They both miss. The Submarine gets to return re. After this single round, the
Submarine may continue its movement. Its movement range is not a ected.

Ending a Patrol:
An aircraft on MAP may opt to return to a land zone or Carrier using its MAP range during the
Non-combat Movement Phase. This can occur in the same Player Turn the patrol started. An
aircraft has to end its patrol before it can be used for other purposes.

Elimination:
An aircraft on MAP is automatically eliminated if it is ever more than its MAP range away from
an available landing spot.

Carrier-based Aircraft:
Aircraft on Carriers have the same MAP range as their land-based counterparts. Thus, they
can reach 1 sea zone away from the sea zone they are currently in. (Exception: 2 with a
Medium Bomber from a Heavy Fleet Carrier if Long-range Aircraft has been researched). Note
that if the Carrier moves or is destroyed, the aircraft must have another suitable landing spot,
otherwise it will be eliminated.

For gameplay purposes, defending aircraft on Carriers may always act as if on MAP. This
enables them to engage Enemy submarines that try to move through the sea zone their Carrier
is in.

Example: Great Britain has a eet with a Carrier containing aircraft in the English Channel.
Germany wants to move two Submarines into the Atlantic, and attempts to pass through the
channel. The carrier-based aircraft engage the Submarines, but Great Britain decides not to
pair Destroyers. Any surviving German Submarines may continue moving.



9.3.2 Air Transports:
Air transports and strategic bombers may pick up airborne infantry before or during their
combat movement and attack one Enemy-possessed land zone in an airborne assault (refer to
10.6.1).




                                                                                              56
         fl




               fl




                      fl




                                   fl




                                            fi




                                                 ff




                                                        ff




                                                               ff
     9.4 Naval Combat Movement:
     If moving into a sea zone containing Enemy Surface Warships, combat occurs. However, the
     Attacker may designate a screening force and a continuing force (refer to 9.4.2).

     If moving Surface Ships into a sea zone containing Enemy aircraft on MAP, the aircraft may
     decline combat unless the Attacker also has aircraft with an attack value present. If there is
     going to be combat, the Attacker may designate a screening force and a continuing force.

     If moving into a sea zone containing Submerged Enemy submarines, these may be ignored.
     Submerged submarines do not have the option to engage.

     If moving into a sea zone containing non-Submerged Enemy submarines, these may decline
     combat unless the Attacker has aircraft on MAP (refer to 10.7). However, the submarines may
     elect to engage any Surface Ships. One round of combat occurs, during the Combat
     Movement Phase, between the submarines and all the Attacking Player’s units. After this
     single round, surviving ships may continue their movement. Their movement range and
     abilities are not a ected.

     Example: Great Britain’s Mediterranean eet in sea zone M8 wants to do an amphibious assault
     from M4 into Sicily. There are two Italian Submarines in sea zone M4. Great Britain has no
     Aircraft in MAP range, but attempts to pass the Submarines. The Italian player decides to have
     the Submarines engage the eet for one round of combat, in which all of Great Britain’s
     Warships may hit the Italian Submarines. The remaining units of the Great Britain’s eet
     continue to the subsequent amphibious assault.

     If moving submarines into a sea zone containing Enemy ships (without an aircraft on MAP), the
     submarines may ignore the ships and continue moving. The submarines may elect to engage
     in combat, attacking all Enemy Surface Ships.

     If moving submarines into a sea zone containing an Enemy aircraft on MAP, the aircraft on
     MAP (optionally together with paired Destroyers) may elect to engage the submarines. (Note:
     Advanced Submarines may only be attacked this way solely by aircraft on MAP.) Other units
     may not participate or be taken as casualties. One round of combat occurs, during the
     Combat Movement Phase. After this single round, surviving submarines may continue their
     movement. Their movement range and abilities are not a ected.

     If moving ships into a zone containing Enemy naval transports, these may be ignored for the
     purpose of movement. However, the Attacker may also engage these in combat (refer to 10.7).



     9.4.1 Naval Supply:
     Major Powers’ Surface Ships (excluding Battlecruisers designated as a raider) without Naval
     Supply have -1 movement. For Capital Ships, this penalty is cumulative with the penalty for
     being damaged.

     Example: The Japanese Major Port in Caroline Islands provide Naval Supply to a Japanese
      eet in the Tasman Sea. The USA player has moved a Submarine to P46 to try to interdict this
     Supply Path. It is the Japanese player's turn. He declares his combat movements. He choses
     to attack the American Submarine in P46 before moving the eet in the Tasman Sea, to
     eliminate the risk of the Submarine potentially interdicting his eet's Supply Path. Had the
     Submarine been able to interdict, the Japanese eet would su er -1 movement.

     Example: A damaged Battleship without Naval Supply has 0 movement, because it gets -1
     from being damaged, and -1 from being without Naval Supply.




                                                                                                      57
fl




        ff




                    fl




                                fl




                                        fl




                                                 ff




                                                      fl




                                                           fl




                                                                ff




                                                                            fl
9.4.2 Screening:
Screening is a form of combat movement which can be used to clear zones of Enemy units,
clearing the path for moving other units through.

Sea Zones:
The Attacking player divides his units into a “screening force” and a “continuing force”. The
screening force then attacks the Enemy units present in the sea zone in the Combat Phase,
with the purpose of clearing the path for the continuing force. If the screening force fails to
eliminate all Enemy Surface Warships and aircraft (except aircraft on MAP which declined
combat), they have lost the screening battle, and the continuing force is forced to retreat (refer
to 10.3). The screening force may be victorious even if all screening units are eliminated. If the
screening force wins the battle, the continuing force may either:

• Carry out an amphibious assault in the sea zone which has just been cleared
   or
• Continue moving. May pick up land units. If the continuing force enters a sea zone
  containing Enemy units, combat occurs (refer to 9.4). The continuing force may repeatedly
  be further subdivided into another screening force and continuing force.

Enemy Fighters:
The Attacking player divides his units into a screening force and a continuing force. The
continuing force can only consist of aircraft. The screening force then attacks the Enemy units
present in the zone in the Combat Phase, with the purpose of eliminating all Enemy Fighters
clearing the path for the continuing force. If the screening force fails to eliminate all Enemy
Fighters, they have lost the screening battle, and the continuing force is forced to retreat (refer
to 10.3). If the screening force eliminates all Enemy Fighters, the continuing force may
continue to conduct another attack. (Exception: It is not possible for the continuing force to
conduct an airborne assault). The continuing force may repeatedly be further subdivided into
another screening force and continuing force.

Example: The German player wants to strategic bomb the British Major Factory in London.
There is a British Fighter on MAP and a British Destroyer in sea zone A23. The German player
sends a screening force consisting of a Fighter and 2 Submarines. The German Fighter scores
a air superiority hit on the rst combat round eliminating the British Fighter. The German player
retreats with his Submarines in the second combat round. As the sea zone is now cleared of
Enemy Fighters, the German continuing force can continue to strategic bomb the British Major
Factory.


9.4.3 Naval Transports:
Naval transports may pick up land units before or during their combat movement and attack
Enemy-possessed land zones in an amphibious assault. This also include while in port (refer to
11.5). The land units must not have moved before being picked up.

In transit, transported units do not have a combat value. If a naval transport is eliminated the
units it carries are also destroyed. A naval transport may unload its units in one or more
adjacent land zones, but may not continue moving after unloading.



9.4.4 Battlecruisers as Raiders:
A Battlecruiser can be designated as a “raider” by placing a marker underneath during the
Combat Movement Phase. It may move up to its full movement in the same Player Turn. While
operating as a raider, it has several special abilities:

• When a raiding Battlecruiser is the Attacker, it can slip through sea zones containing Enemy
  units, with a Battlecruiser die roll deciding if it can successfully slip through. If unsuccessful,
  combat occurs.

                                                                                                  58
             fi
     • When a Battlecruiser designated as a raider is the Defender, Enemy units may ignore it
       when moving into or through its sea zone without having to engage in naval combat. If the
       Enemy units elect to engage a lone raiding Battlecruiser, a Battlecruiser die roll decides if
       the attacking units are successful in engaging (refer to 10.7) or if the Battlecruiser has the
       option to slip away. If it wants to slip away, it remains in the same sea zone.
     • If a raiding Battlecruiser is located in a sea zone with other defending units, it is up to the
       Attacker if he wants to engage the Battlecruiser or not. If the Attacker wants to engage, a
       Battlecruiser die roll decides if the Attacker is successful or if the Battlecruiser has the
       option to slip away. If the Battlecruiser loses the die roll, the Battlecruiser defends together
       with other units in the sea zone in regular combat. If the Battlecruiser wins the die roll and
       elects to slip away, it stays in the same sea zone, but avoids the ensuing combat.
     • A Battlecruiser designated as a raider cannot attack opposing naval units together with
       other units.


     Battlecruiser Die Roll:
     Both players roll a D12 using below modi ers. The highest die wins. In the case of a tie, roll
     again. If there is more than one Battlecruiser designated as a raider in a zone, roll for each one
     separately.


               Modifier for Battlecruiser                       Modifiers for Opponent
                                                                         (cumulative)

      • +6 for Battlecruiser                             • +1 per Surface Warship in sea zone
      • +1 has developed Radar technology                • +4 per aircraft with an attack value in
                                                            sea zone
                                                         • +1 has developed Radar technology

     Example: A British eet consisting of one Battleship, one Light Carrier with a Fighter, one
     Heavy Cruiser and two Destroyers attacks a German eet consisting of a Battlecruiser
     designated as raider together with two Destroyers. The British player decides he wants to
     engage the Battlecruiser, and rolls a “3”. With modi ers this totals 3+5+4=12. The German
     player rolls a “5”, for a total of 5+6=11. As the British player won the die roll, all ships are
     moved to the battle board and naval combat occurs. Had the British player rolled a “1” instead,
     the German player would have won the battlecruiser die roll, and had the German Battlecruiser
     wanted to slip away, the British eet would only have been able to engage the two Destroyers.

     Example: A Battlecruiser in sea zone M2 wants to slip by a Heavy Cruiser and a Light Cruiser in
     sea zone M4, to reach sea zone M8 which contains two undefended Naval Transports. The
     Battlecruiser is placed on a “Raider” marker and moves into sea zone M4. A Battlecruiser die
     roll is made. If the raider successfully slips through, he may move to sea zone M8 and attack
     the Naval Transports.

     In the beginning of the owning player’s Combat Movement Phase, a Battlecruiser can be taken
     o its raiding designation by removing the raider marker. It can be used for other purposes the
     same Player Turn.



     9.4.5 Escorts:
     Surface Warships in a sea zone may be designated as escorts. They may move up to their full
     movement before being designated. They cannot perform other combat movement the Player
     Turn they are being designated.

     Escorting ships protect all members of the Alliance they are Aligned with - even against units
     from nations at peace with the escorting ships’ owner. Each escorting ship gets one defensive


                                                                                                     59
ff




          fl




                        fl




                                  fi




                                            fi




                                                 fl
roll against submarines and aircraft on MAP that are Supply Path interdicting or convoy raiding
in the sea zone they are in (refer to 10.9).

Enemy units may ignore escorting ships when moving into or through a sea zone, or when
attacking other units in that sea zone. It is up to the Attacking player to decide if he wants to
engage escorting ships, or not. If he chooses to engage the escorting ships, they defend
together with other units in the sea zone in regular combat.

A Surface Warship may be taken o its escort designation at any time during the owning
player’s turn.

A Battlecruiser cannot be designated as both an escort and a raider at the same time.



9.4.6 Blockade:
Three or more Surface Warships from the same Alliance in a sea zone without Enemy Surface
Warships automatically blockade all Enemy Supply Paths in that sea zone, and all Enemy
Naval Facilities adjacent to that sea zone. If a Naval Facility is adjacent to two sea zones, both
sea zones have to be blockaded in order for the Naval Facility to be blockaded.

Blockading does not e ect the ability to do combat movement out of a Naval Facility.
However, the blockading Enemy units must be eliminated by a screening force for Surface
Ships to continue movement. Units may not go in port at a blockaded Naval Facility. Units
may only be built in port at a blockaded Major Shipyard. You cannot blockade a nation’s Naval
Facilities if you are at peace with that nation.




                                                                                                60
         ff




                      ff
                              Chapter 10 - Combat Phase

     10.1 Order of Attacks:
     Resolve combats that were declared in the Combat Movement Phase. The Attacking player
     decides in which order the declared combats are resolved.

     Example: The German player has declared two combats: An attack on Western Ukraine and
     strategic bombing of the Airbase in Kiev. He chooses to resolve the strategic bombing combat
       rst, because he wants to eliminate the Soviet player’s ability to scramble Fighters from Kiev
     into the land combat in Western Ukraine.

     When resolving a combat, the Attacker and Defender each place their units on their respective
     Battle Boards on the number that corresponds to their modi ed attack or defense values.
     Rolling the attack number or lower scores a hit.

     Units that have the opportunity to participate in multiple battles in a particular Player Turn (i.e.
     scrambling, intercepting, escorting, etc.) can only participate in one battle per Player Turn.
     There are four exceptions:
     • Blitzing (refer to 10.5.1)
     • Single rounds of combat in a sea zone (refer to 9.3.1, 9.4, 10.8.1, and 11.4)
     • Naval units targeted in a port attack (refer to 10.6.4).
     • Germany's "Blitzkrieg" special ability (refer to 15.1).
     Example: Germany declares war on France and uses the “Blitzkrieg” special ability. In the rst
     sequence of attacks, Germany attacks Paris and fails to win in 3 rounds. In the second
     sequence of attacks, Germany attacks again. The French units in Paris get to defend in both
     battles.


     10.2 Special Abilities

     First Round of Combat

     First Strike: On the rst round of combat, units with rst strike roll before other units and those
     casualties are immediately removed without a defense roll (unless they also have rst strike). If
     units on both sides have rst strike, those units all re at the same time.

     Air Superiority: In the rst round of combat any casualties caused by units with air superiority
     must be assigned rst to Enemy aircraft present in that battle.

     Carpet Bombing: Strategic bombers that participate in an attack against land units in a land
     zone engage in carpet bombing. They only participate in the rst combat round. Only land
     units can be attacked by carpet bombing. Facilities are attacked via strategic bombing (refer
     to 10.6.2). The only defending units that are able to return re on attacking bombers are Anti-
     aircraft Artillery and Fighters. After the rst combat round is resolved, surviving attacking
     bombers immediately move to a suitable landing spot.

     Anti-aircraft Artillery: Only participate in the rst round of combat. Each Anti-aircraft Artillery
     gets 1 shot per aircraft, up to a maximum of 3 shots per Anti-aircraft Artillery unit. Refer to
     table for the number of dice the Anti-aircraft Artillery units get to roll based on the number of
     aircraft available as targets. Although Anti-aircraft Artillery units cannot re in subsequent
     rounds of combat, they may be taken as casualties in any combat round.



                                                                                                       61
fi




          fi




               fi




                    fi




                         fi




                                fi




                                     fi




                                            fi




                                                 fi




                                                      fi




                                                           fi




                                                                fi




                                                                     fi




                                                                             fi




                                                                                      fi
    # of Anti-aircraft                                        # of dice Anti-aircraft
                                 # of aircraft
      Artillery units                                          Artillery gets to use
             1                          1                                 1
             1                          2                                 2
             1                     3 or more                              3
             2                          1                                 2
             2                          2                                 4
             2                     3 or more                              6
             3                          1                                 3
             3                          2                                 6
             3                     3 or more                              9

Example: Japan attacks Burma with 4 aircraft. FEC defends with 2 Anti-aircraft Artillery units.
Thus, FEC would roll 6 dice. If FEC had 4 Anti-Aircraft Artillery, they would roll with 12 dice.


All Rounds of Combat

Target Selection: Units that roll Target Selection hits assign casualties the opposing player
must remove. Target Selection is a dice range limited to a speci c class or type of unit (i.e.
vehicle-class units or land/naval units). For example, a unit with an Attack of “7” and a Target
Selection of “1-3” would allow the owning player to choose which casualty it causes on a
“1-3”. On a “4-7” the opposing player would choose. When a player achieves a Target
Selection hit with a double casualty situation, only one unit is subject to Target Selection. If no
units of that speci c class are available, the hit is selected by the opposing player (i.e. a
normal casualty).



10.3 Retreating from Combat
Attacking units may retreat prior to the beginning of their next combat round. A continuing
force may be forced to retreat following lost Screening (refer to 9.4.2). Retreated units cannot
be moved again in non-combat movement, except for going in port (refer to 11.5). A player
who chooses to retreat must retreat with all their units in that battle. Exception: aircraft and
land units which attacked from adjacent land zones may retreat while amphibiously
assaulting / airborne assaulting units are forced to remain.

Attacking Land Units: Must retreat to adjacent Friendly land zones. At least one attacking land
unit must have come from that zone. Retreating units can retreat to more than one zone, if
desired.

Attacking Aircraft: May only retreat to the limit of their remaining movement points. Aircraft on
MAP may only retreat their patrol range.

Attacking Naval Units: Must retreat to adjacent sea zones. At least one attacking ship must
have come from that zone. Retreating units can retreat into more than one zone, if desired.

Defending Submarines: Must always Submerge after the rst combat round, and stay in the
sea zone. Submerging lasts for the rest of the Attacking Player’s Turn.




                                                                                                 62
    fi




                                               fi




                                                    fi
10.4 Scrambling into Combat:
• Airbases allow its owner to send up to three Fighters into combat in adjacent land or sea
  zones where it has at least one Friendly defending unit or facility being bombed.
• Seaplane Bases allow its owner to send up to three Seaplanes into combat in adjacent sea
  zones where it has at least one Friendly defending unit.
• Major Ports, Dockyards and Shipyards allow its owner to send up to three Surface
  Warships in port (refer to 11.5) into combat in adjacent sea zones where it has at least one
  Friendly defending unit.
• Submarine Bases allow its owner to send up to three submarines in port into combat in
  adjacent sea zones where it has at least one Friendly defending unit.
• If Radar technology has been developed, each Heavy Fleet Carrier allows its owner to send
  up to three Fighters into combat in adjacent land or sea zones where it has at least one
  Friendly defending unit or facility being bombed. In addition, if Radar technology has been
  developed, bases and major Naval Facilities may scramble an unlimited number of units.

Units present from nations Aligned with an owner of the facility may be part of scrambled units
from that facility. The limit on how many units that can scramble per Player Turn is determined
by the owner of the facility. Scrambling does not count as movement, since it happens in
another player’s turn.

Example: USA moves into sea zone P16 intending to amphibiously assault Tokyo. Japan has 3
ships in sea zone P16. Japan also has two groups each consisting of 3 Surface Ships, one
group in port at the Major Port in Honshu, one group in port at the Major Shipyard in Tokyo. In
Tokyo, Japan also has 3 aircraft. After USA completes its combat movement, it divides its eet
into a screening force and the continuing force. Japan scrambles the 3 aircraft and 6 ships into
sea zone P16 to combat the screening force with the already present Japanese ships.

Example: An Italian eet in sea zone M3 is attacked. There are 2 German Fighters and 2 Italian
Fighters in Northern Italy. Italy has not developed Radar technology. The German and Italian
players decide to scramble both German Fighters and just 1 Italian Fighter.

Scrambling is not allowed into combat involving a single round of defending submarines
engaging moving Surface Ships (refer to 9.4, 10.8.1, and 11.4) or into combat subject to a
Japanese surprise attack.

After the Combat Phase surviving scrambling units return to their originating location. If the
original location is no longer available, because it was destroyed or captured, the scrambled
units are eliminated. Scrambling aircraft does not count as going on MAP.


10.5 Land Combat:
Land Combat Sequence:

1. Defender decides if he wants to scramble eligible Fighters from adjacent zones.
2. Defender decides if his aircraft should participate in combat or not. If he declines combat
   and keeps his aircraft grounded - and loses the combat (Attacker has surviving units and
   the Defender has no surviving units left in combat), they are eliminated.
3. First Strike: Attacking and defending units with rst strike roll rst. Casualties are
   immediately removed from the battle board.
4. Air Superiority/AAA: Attacking and defending ghters and anti-aircraft artillery roll.
   Casualties from these units must be taken from opposing aircraft (if possible).
5. Attacker rolls for all remaining attacking units. Attacking units that get a Target Selection
   hit select which unit the Defender must take as a casualty.
6. Defender selects remaining casualties and moves them to the side (they get to defend).




                                                                                               63
      fl




                                 fi




                                      fi




                                                 fi




                                                                              fl
7. Defender rolls for all remaining defending units. Once defending units that were taken as
    casualties make their roll, remove them from the battle board. Defending units that get a
    Target Selection hit select which unit the Attacker must take as a casualty.
8. Attacker selects and removes remaining casualties from the battle board.
9. Retreat: Attacker has the option to retreat if possible.
10. Repeat steps 5-9 until the battle is over. (If it is a city land zone, and combat has not been
    resolved in three combat rounds, refer to 1.7.7).

Blitz: Units that can participate in a blitz can now potentially continue.



10.5.1 Blitz
Requirements:

• Combat lasted 2 rounds or less and units must have su cient remaining movement.
• Eligible units:
   - Light Armor
   - Medium Armor (including Soviet T-34)
   - Heavy Armor (including German Tiger I)
   - German Panzergrenadiers.
• Blitzing armor can pair with one of these units on a 1:1 ratio:
   - Mechanized Infantry
   - Self-propelled Artillery (including Soviet Katyusha Rocket Artillery)
   - Fighters
   - Tactical Bombers

• Blitzing armor can pair with two of these units on a 2:1 ratio:
   - Advanced Mechanized Infantry

Prohibitions:

No blitzing:

• Into or out of mountain, desert, jungle, marsh, or tundra/ice terrain.
• Across borders protected by a Forti cation.
• After crossing an opposing Forti cation.
• Out of cities.
• After an amphibious assault.
• Into a Friendly-possesses land zone
Example: Germany Possesses Switzerland, and attacks Alsace-Lorraine from both Switzerland
and Bavaria. Combat is resolved in 2 combat rounds. The land units coming from Bavaria are
subject to the Maginot Line, so they cannot participate in a subsequent blitz. The land units
coming from Switzerland can blitz into an adjacent land zone unless they have to cross a
border with a Forti cation built by the French player.

Example: USSR attacks Romania in Bessarabia from Southern Ukraine. Even if combat only
lasts 2 rounds or less, they cannot blitz further into Central Romania, because it is a mountain
land zone.



10.5.2 Border Clashes
A special form of land combat that can occur between nations at peace over select land zone
borders without a declaration of war. Note that in border clashes, the units involved do not
actually move into the opposing land zone (they are clashing at the border).


                                                                                                64
     fi




                   fi




                        fi




                                            ffi
          Nation A              Nation B           Condition
          Japan                 USSR               Anytime, except if they signed Japanese-Soviet
          (Manchukuo)                              Non-Aggression Pact.
          France                Germany            If Germany/USSR signed Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
          (Alsace-Lorraine)     (Bavaria)          and Germany has attacked Poland.


          Either side may attack units on the other side of a jointly held land border in 1 round of
          combat. All units must start and end in the bordering land zones (aircraft may not be brought
          in from di erent zones). Militia may not be used by the Attacker. If units participate in a border
          clash, they may not be moved in the subsequent Non-combat Movement Phase. You can not
          conquer land zones in border clashes.


          10.5.3 Attrition Attacks
          Advanced Artillery can make attrition attacks on land zones they have been adjacent to since
          the beginning of the Player Turn. Combat lasts for one combat round only. This attack is a
          separate combat from any other combats that may be happening in the same land zone.
          Attrition attacks are una ected by terrain modi ers. Defending units cannot return re.
          Attacking units cannot be moved on the same turn they perform an attrition attack.

          Forti cations reduce the e ect of attrition attacks by 1 (refer to 13.2.6).


          10.6 Air Combat
          Special Rules for Seaplanes:

          • Seaplanes can never participate in land combat, and will be eliminated if they are the only
            defending unit in an attacked land zone.
          • Seaplanes can only cause hits to submarines or naval transports. A hit by a Seaplane would
            not count unless:

             a.   an Enemy submarine was present or
             b.   the only surviving Enemy unit was a naval transport.

          Special Rules for Air Transports:

          • Air transports will be eliminated if they are the only defending unit in an attacked land zone.
          • Air transports must be the last units selected as casualties, except on the rst round of
            combat as the Attacker when participating in an airborne assault (i.e. carrying airborne
            infantry). Air transports not carrying airborne infantry which are subject to Anti-aircraft
            Artillery or air superiority must be the last aircraft selected as casualties.



          10.6.1 Airborne Assault
          Air Transports and strategic bombers may transport one airborne infantry into an airborne
          assault. A Heavy Air Transport may transport two airborne infantry into an airborne assault. An
          airborne assaulting unit cannot retreat from combat.

          Airborne Assault Combat Sequence:

          1. Defender decides if he wants to scramble eligible Fighters from adjacent zones.



                                                                                                          65
fi




     ff




                     ff




                          ff




                                              fi




                                                                          fi




                                                                                   fi
     2. Defender decides if his aircraft should participate in combat or not. If he declines combat
         and keeps his aircraft grounded - and loses the combat (Attacker has surviving units and
         the Defender has no surviving units left in combat), they are eliminated.
     3. First Strike: Attacking and defending units with rst strike roll rst. Casualties are
         immediately removed from the battle board.
     4. Air Superiority/AAA: Attacking and defending ghters and anti-aircraft artillery roll.
         Casualties from these units must be taken from opposing aircraft (if possible).
     5. Defender rolls for Anti-aircraft Artillery. Attacker selects casualties and moves them to the
         side (they get to attack, exception: In step 3, 4, or 5, an airborne assaulting infantry may
         not be taken as a casualty separate from its transporting aircraft. The two units are both
         eliminated and count as a single casualty if selected in any of these steps).
     6. Attacker moves transporting aircraft to a suitable landing spot.
     7. Attacker rolls for all remaining attacking units. Once attacking units that were taken as
         casualties make their roll, remove them from the battle board. Attacking units that get a
         Target Selection hit select which unit the Defender must take as a casualty.
     8. Defender selects remaining casualties and moves them to the side (they get to defend).
     9. Defender rolls for all remaining defending units. Once defending units that were taken as
         casualties make their roll, remove them from the battle board. Defending units that get a
         Target Selection hit select which unit the Attacker must take as a casualty.
     10. Attacker selects and removes remaining casualties from the battle board.
     11. Attacker has the option to retreat with non-airborne/non-amphibiously assaulting attacking
         units.
     12. Repeat steps 7-11 until the battle is over.

     If the zone being attacked is a city zone, the Defender rolls for inherent city Anti-aircraft
     Artillery, one die per attacking aircraft transporting airborne infantry, up to an unlimited number
     (not up to 3 like a normal Anti-aircraft Artillery unit). If the Anti-aircraft Artillery hits, both the
     aircraft and its cargo are destroyed before the rst combat round. If the Attacker has
     developed Airborne Doctrine technology, defending cities no longer have inherent city Anti-
     aircraft Artillery.

     Example: After developing Airborne Doctrine technology, the German player attacks Kiev with
     1 Fighter and 1 Air Transport carrying 1 Airborne Infantry in an airborne assault. The Soviet
     player has 1 Militia and 1 Forti cation. The Soviet Forti cation rolls 1 rst strike hit. The
     German player is forced to take the Fighter as casualty. The Soviet Militia defends at 4 in the
      rst combat round. If the Soviet Forti cation rolls 2 rst strike hits, the second hit has no e ect.



     10.6.2 Strategic Bombing
     Medium Bombers, strategic bombers, and Strategic Rockets may carry out strategic bombing
     of facilities. Note: Damaged facilities have reduced capabilities or may even be rendered
     useless (refer to 13.2). Facilities have a maximum damage value after which they cannot be
     further damaged (refer to 13.2).

     Medium and strategic bombers, Strategic Rockets, and Advanced Artillery may carry out
     strategic bombing of cities. Such bombing does not destroy facilities, but instead permanently
     destroys IPPs.

     Strategic Bombing Combat Sequence:

     1. Attacker decides if he wants to send escorting Fighters with the bombers.
     2. Defender decides if he wants to send intercepting Fighters (refer to 10.6.3).
     3. If Defender decides to send intercepting ghters, one round of interception combat occurs
        using the interception values for intercepting Fighters, escorting Fighters, and
        bombers. Casualties are removed from the battle board.
     4. Attacker rolls strategic damage for surviving bombers. Damage is marked.




                                                                                                         66
fi




                       fi




                              fi




                                   fi




                                        fi




                                             fi




                                                  fi




                                                       fi




                                                            fi




                                                                 fi




                                                                      fi




                                                                                        ff
     5. Defender rolls for inherent facility Anti-aircraft Artillery, one die per attacking bomber, up to
        an unlimited number (not up to 3 like a normal Anti-aircraft Artillery unit). Anti-aircraft
        Artillery units in the land zone do not defend against strategic bombing.
     6. Attacker selects and removes casualties.
     7. Attacker lands his aircraft.


     Special Rules for Strategic Rockets:

     Strategic Rockets can also be used for strategic bombing, but are never subject to
     interception. Strategic Rockets do not face inherent facility Anti-aircraft Artillery re unless the
     Defender has developed Radar technology. If the Defender has developed Radar technology,
     the Defender rolls for inherent facility Anti-aircraft Artillery, one die per attacking Strategic
     Rocket, up to an unlimited number. If a Strategic Rocket is hit, the strategic bombing fails and
     no damage is done. The Attacker rolls 1D6 damage for each surviving Strategic Rocket.
     Damage is marked. Strategic Rockets are destroyed after a single use.

     Special Rules for Strategic Bombing of Cities:

     For every 20 damage that is in icted to a city,                               Maximum Damage
     reduce the IPP value of the city by 1. Cities
     have inherent Anti-Aircraft Artillery.            Major Power Capitals                  60

     Once the maximum damage has been                   Other Cities                          45
     in icted, the Attacking player places a
     destroyed city marker, and moves a technology being researched by the player possessing the
     city on stage 1-3 one stage down. A destroyed city cannot be repaired. Destroyed cities still
     count as cities as far as terrain or strategic objectives. A destroyed victory city is worth 0
     victory points.

     Special Rules for Strategic Bombing of Railroads:

     Railroads do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery. After rolling for strategic damage, the
     Attacker chooses one of the borders of the targeted land zone to apply the damage to. All
     railroads on that border are a ected. The terrain on the border the railroad is in determines the
     maximum damage value (refer to 13.2.8). The Attacker needs only to be at war with the owner
     of the attacked land zone.

     Example: Great Britain wishes to strategic bomb the Railroad in German-possessed Alsace-
     Lorraine on the border towards Switzerland. A Medium Bomber rolls “3” in damage, but as the
     Railroad is in normal terrain, maximum damage is 1. The German player places a damage
     marker on the French side of the border.



     10.6.3 Interception Combat
     Players subject to Strategic Bombing may send intercepting Fighters against the attacking
     units.

     Eligible defending units:
     • Fighters up to an unlimited number in the land zone containing the facility being
        strategically bombed.
     • Fighters in an adjacent land zone to the facility being strategically bombed with an Airbase.
        Same limitations as scrambling apply.
     • Fighters on a Heavy Fleet Carrier in an adjacent sea zone to the facility being strategically
        bombed (if Radar technology developed).

     Combat lasts for one combat round only, where all aircraft participate at reduced values. All
     casualties are removed at the end of the interception combat. If Defender loses the land zone

                                                                                                      67
fl




                     ff




                          fl




                                                                           fi
     from where the ghters intercept, they are eliminated.


     10.6.4 Port Attacks
     Fighters, Seaplanes, Tactical Bombers & Medium Bombers may carry out bombing of Enemy
     ships in port. Combat lasts for one round. Eligible aircraft attack/defend at normal values.
     Note the special conditions for Seaplanes (refer to 10.6). Attacking aircraft have to be able to
     reach a sea zone adjacent to the facility to do a port attack. When conducting a port attack
     against a Submarine Base, aircraft do not need to be on MAP to hit submarines.

     Port Attack Combat Sequence:

     1. Defender decides if he wants to scramble eligible Fighters from zones adjacent to the sea
        zone.
     2. Defender decides if his Fighters in the land zone where the facility is located should
        participate in combat or not.
     3. Combat occurs between attacking aircraft and defending Fighters and ships in port (ships
        defend at “0”).
     4. Air Superiority: Attacking and defending ghters. Casualties from these units must be
        taken from opposing aircraft (if possible).
     5. Attacker rolls for all remaining attacking units. Attacking units that get a Target Selection
        hit select which unit the Defender must take as a casualty.
     6. Defender selects remaining casualties and moves them to the side (they get to defend).
     7. Defender rolls for inherent facility Anti-aircraft Artillery, one die per attacking aircraft, up to
        an unlimited number (not up to 3 like a normal Anti-aircraft Artillery unit). Anti-aircraft
        Artillery units in the land zone do not defend against port attacks.
     8. Attacker selects and removes casualties.
     9. Attacker lands his aircraft.



     10.6.5 Carpet Bombing
     Available after developing Heavy Strategic Bombers technology, Strategic bombers may
     attack a land zone by conducting carpet bombing. Only land units can be attacked. The only
     defending units that are able to hit the attacking bombers are Anti-aircraft Artillery and
     Fighters. Defending Fighters may scramble into the zone. Fighters use their normal defense
     values. If strategic bombers are engaging in carpet bombing in the same land zone as other
     units conducting normal land combat, the carpet bombing is part of that land combat (but only
     the rst round). After the rst combat round is resolved, surviving attacking bombers move to
     a suitable landing spot.


     10.7 Naval Combat
     Some naval units have special rules.

     Special Rules for Submarines:

     • Submarines have the rst strike ability unless the Enemy has a Destroyer present.
     • Submarines have Target Selection versus Surface Ships at “1”, including naval transports.
     • Submarines can never cause a hit to an aircraft.
     • Defending submarines may decline combat and stay non-Submerged in the sea zone
            unless the Attacker has aircraft on MAP or while in port (refer to 11.5).
     • Aircraft on MAP may be paired 1:1 with Destroyers when attacking submarines.
     • Defending submarines may choose to only take casualties from hits by aircraft on MAP as
       well as potential paired Destroyers, unless the submarines initiated the combat or while in
       port (refer to 11.5).
     • Defending submarines must Submerge after the rst combat round.


                                                                                                         68
fi




       fi




                  fi




                       fi




                                     fi




                                              fi
     Example: Attacker performs a screening without aircraft on MAP. The Defender has
     submarines. The submarines decline combat and stay non-Submerged in the sea zone. Any
     continuing force will then be subject to a possible attack by the submarines when passing. The
     units performing the screening do not get to participate (refer to 9.4).

     Example: A eet with 1 Fighter on MAP paired with a Destroyer attacks an enemy eet
     containing both Surface Ships and submarines. The Attacker’s Fighter scores a hit, but the
     paired Destroyer misses in the rst round of combat. It is up to the Defender if he wants to take
     a submarine as casualty. The Defender then rolls for all Warships, including submarines, and
     the remaining defending submarines Submerge. In round 2 of combat, the defending
     submarines are no longer in the battle and can no longer be taken as casualties.

     Special Rules for Defending Battlecruisers Designated as Raiders:

     • Need to be discovered to be engaged (refer to 9.4.4).
     • Combat lasts for one combat round only. If combat is not resolved, participating ships stays
       in the sea zone.
     • If the defending Battlecruiser scores a hit, it has Target Selection versus naval units.
     Special Rules for Naval Transports:

     • Naval transports are chosen last as casualties, unless:
       • They are the only valid targets available for submarines (i.e. only remaining targets are
          aircraft and Naval Transports) or
        • Attacker chooses to take as casualty against defending Coastal Artillery in an
         amphibious assault or
      • Subject to Target Selection.
     • a naval transport is eliminated, its cargo is also eliminated.
      If

     Naval Combat Sequence:

     1. Defender decides if he wants to scramble eligible units.
     2. Defender decides if his aircraft on carriers should participate in combat or not. If he declines
        combat and keeps his aircraft on deck - and loses the combat (Attacker has surviving units
        and the Defender has no surviving units left in combat), they are eliminated.
     3. First Strike: Attacking and defending units with rst strike roll rst. Casualties are
        immediately removed from the battle board.
     4. Air Superiority: Attacking and defending ghters. Casualties from these units must be taken
        from opposing aircraft (if possible).
     5. Attacker rolls for all remaining attacking units. Attacking units that get a Target Selection hit
        select which unit the Defender must take as a casualty.
     6. Defender selects remaining casualties and moves them to the side (they get to defend).
     7. Defender rolls for all remaining defending units. Once defending units that were taken as
        casualties make their roll, remove them from the battle board. Defending units that get a
        Target Selection hit select which unit the Attacker must take as casualty.
     8. Attacker selects and removes remaining casualties from the battle board.
     9. Retreat: Attacker has the option to retreat if possible.
     10.Surviving defending submarines must Submerge.
     11.Repeat steps 5-9 until the battle is over.

     If Defender lost Carriers containing aircraft, these aircraft have a movement of 1 to
     immediately move to a suitable landing spot. If they are unable to do so, they are eliminated.

     If the naval units were a screening force and were victorious (refer to 9.4.2), the continuing
     force can carry out an amphibious assault (including shore bombardment) or move into an
     adjacent sea zone. If any Enemy naval units are present, combat occurs (refer to 9.4).




                                                                                                      69
fl




                       fi




                                 fi




                                        fi




                                                       fi




                                                                            fl
          10.8 Amphibious Assault
          Amphibious assaults usually consist of several phases:

          1. Naval combat by screening force
          2. Shore bombardment and defending Coastal Artillery rst strikes
          3. The amphibious assault


          10.8.1 Naval Combat by Screening Force
          All Enemy Surface Ships and aircraft (except aircraft on MAP which declined combat) in the
          sea zone from which the amphibious assault is initiated must rst be eliminated. Defending
          players may scramble eligible units (refer to 10.4). Enemy submarines can still be present in
          the sea zone, and any remaining Non-submerged Enemy submarines may attack the
          continuing force for one round (refer to 9.4).


          10.8.2 Shore Bombardment / Defending Coastal Artillery
          Attacking ships that have not participated in naval combat this Player Turn may carry out
          shore bombardment in support of an amphibious assault. The maximum number of shore
          bombarding ships is equal to the number of amphibiously assaulting land units.

          Forti cations reduce the e ect of shore bombardment by 1 (refer to 13.2.6).

          Defending Coastal Artillery placed on the assaulted land/sea border may defend against shore
          bombarding ships and naval transports carrying the invasion force. Each Coastal Artillery gets
          one defense roll at “3” per attacking ship shore bombarding and/or unloading units in the
          amphibious assault up to a maximum of three shots.

          Due to rst strike, casualties from both shore bombardment and Coastal Artillery are removed
          immediately.



          10.8.3 The Amphibious Assault
          On the rst combat round:

          • Only aircraft and infantry-class units may participate on the Attacker’s side. (Exception: All
            land units can participate in an amphibious assault from the rst combat round when
            debarking from an Attack Naval Transport, or when there are no defending units present.)
            Any other amphibiously assaulting land units must wait until the second round of combat.
          • Amphibiously assaulting land units su er double casualties unless they are Marines (or any
            infantry-class units once the Attacker has developed Amphibious Doctrine technology).
            Double casualties means that one hit equals two casualties.
          • At least one land unit has to survive the rst round of combat for the non-infantry-class
            units to participate in the second round of combat.
          • Attacking aircraft may be chosen as casualties.
          On any combat round:

          If airborne assaulting units or land units from adjacent land zones are attacking at the same
          time as amphibiously assaulting units, amphibiously assaulting units must be chosen as
          casualties before these other land units. All defending units participate normally.

          Amphibious Assault Combat Sequence:



                                                                                                          70
fi




     fi




     fi




                       ff




                                   ff




                                        fi




                                                  fi




                                                          fi




                                                               fi
1. Defender decides if he wants to scramble eligible units.
2. Defender decides if his aircraft should participate in combat or not. If he declines combat
    and keeps his aircraft grounded - and loses the combat (Attacker has surviving units and
    the Defender has no surviving units left in combat), they are eliminated.
3. First Strike: Attacking and defending units with rst strike roll rst. Casualties are
    immediately removed from the battle board.
4. Air Superiority/AAA: Attacking and defending ghters and anti-aircraft artillery roll.
    Casualties from these units must be taken from opposing aircraft (if possible).
5. Attacker rolls for all remaining attacking units. Attacking units that get a Target Selection
    hit select which unit the Defender must take as a casualty.
6. Defender selects remaining casualties and moves them to the side (they get to defend).
7. Defender rolls for all remaining defending units. Once defending units that were taken as
    casualties make their roll, remove them from the battle board. Defending units that get a
    Target Selection hit select which unit the Attacker must take as casualty.
8. Attacker selects and removes remaining casualties from the battle board.
9. Retreat: Attacker has the option to retreat with non-airborne/non-amphibiously assaulting
    attacking units.
10. Repeat steps 5-9 until the battle is over. (If it is a city land zone, and combat has not been
    resolved in three combat rounds, refer to 1.7.7).

It is neither possible for land units to retreat nor blitz from an amphibious assault. Aircraft and
the units attacking from adjacent land zones are able to blitz or retreat.

Example: Japan attacks British Malaya both amphibiously as well as from Siam. The Japanese
player rolls poorly, and decides to retreat. He is only able to retreat with his land units coming
from Siam as well and his aircraft. His amphibiously assaulting land units must continue the
attack until combat is resolved.

If a naval transport is carrying 2 units, and drops o only 1 to perform an amphibious assault,
the other unit may not debark during the Non-combat Movement Phase. It must remain on
board the naval transport until next turn.

Example: A Spanish Nationalist Naval Transport picks up an Infantry and Artillery from Spanish
Morocco, moves to sea zone A28, where its Infantry amphibiously assaults Basque Country.
The Artillery stays on board.

After combat is resolved, ships which participated in the shore bombardment or unloading of
land units, can only go in port (refer to 11.5) in a Naval Facility in that captured land zone. To
go in port, the ships may only have been used for an amphibious assault against one land
zone.



10.9 Convoy Raiding:
Players may attempt to raid Enemy IPPs along open convoy lines using the following units:
Battlecruisers, submarines and aircraft on MAP. Ships may move up to their full movement
before raiding. If more than one unit is raiding a line, roll both the Attacker and Defender
convoy rolls separately for each raiding unit. If a sea zone has more than one convoy line:

• The Attacker decides if he wants to engage some or all of the lines.
• The Attacker is able to raid up to the combined value of all convoy lines being raided.
• The Attacker decides which convoy lines the IPP loss should be taken from.
Example: Japan convoy raids the Allies in P50. British Commonwealth has developed Anti-
submarine Warfare technology. Japan elects to just convoy raid the USA convoy line, to avoid
the +1 convoy modi er and the risk of the convoy’s defensive roll at “2”.




                                                                                                 71
      fi




                                  fi




                                       fi




                                            ff




                                                   fi
          A nation may not lose more than the maximum IPP value of each convoy line per Player Turn.
          Use damage markers as IPP loss trackers to ensure this maximum is not exceeded for any
          particular convoy line in a Player Turn. Remove IPP loss trackers on convoy lines in the Place
          Units Phase.

          Raiding Process:
          Both Attacker and Defender roll a D6 convoy roll using below modi ers:


                       Modifiers for Attacker                                         Modifiers for Defender
                             (cumulative)                                                   (cumulative)

           • +1 if Coastal Submarine or aircraft             • +1 per escorting ship in sea zone
           • +1 if more than one raiding submarine in        • +1 has developed ASW technology
             sea zone and has developed Advanced             • +1 has developed Long-range Aircraft
             Submarines technology                             technology
           • +1 has developed Radar technology               • +1 has developed Radar technology
           • +2 if Battlecruiser or Submarine                • +2 per aircraft on MAP in sea zone
           • +4 if Advanced Submarine

          If the Attacker’s modi ed roll is greater than the Defender’s modi ed roll, determine the
          di erence. The Defender loses that amount of IPPs to the bank.

          Example: Sea zone A44 has three British Commonwealth convoy lines totaling 15 IPP. A raiding
          German Advanced Submarine rolls a “6”, and with his +4 modi er, his convoy roll equals 10.
          The British player rolls a “1”, and with no modi er, his convoy roll equals 1. The British player
          thus loses 9 IPP to the bank. The German player decides which convoy lines the IPP loss
          should be taken from.

          Convoy Raiding Submarines:
          Escorting ships get one defensive roll against convoy raiding submarines. The submarines in
          this case do not get to re back (they are using their attack on convoy raiding). Note: If the
          Defender has developed ASW technology, then they get a defensive roll at “2” against raiding
          submarines.

          Example: Great Britain has developed ASW technology. A German Submarine raids a British
          convoy line with a Destroyer designated as an escort. The German player rolls a “3”, and with
          his +2 modi er, his convoy roll equals 5. The British player rolls a “2”, and with his +2 modi er,
          his convoy roll equals 4. The British player thus loses 1 IPP to the bank. The British player then
          gets two defensive rolls, one for the Destroyer at “4”, and one for having developed ASW at
          “2”. If either scores a hit, the Submarine is eliminated.

          Example: Three Submarines are conducting Convoy Raiding in a sea zone containing a
          Destroyer designated as an escort. The escort will provide a +1 modi er for each of the three
          separate raiding rolls, but it will only get a single defensive roll at “4” against the raiding
          Submarines.

          Convoy Raiding Battlecruisers:
          Attacking Battlecruisers may engage in convoy raiding regardless if they are designated as
          raiders or not (refer to 9.4.4). Escorting ships do not get defensive rolls against convoying
          Battlecruisers.

          Convoy Raiding Aircraft:
          Attacking Tactical Bombers, Medium Bombers and Seaplanes on MAP may engage in convoy
          raiding using the raiding process procedure if there is no defending aircraft on MAP in the sea
          zone. If escorting ships are present in the sea zone these get to re at the raiding aircraft with
          a single defensive roll for each escort ship.


                                                                                                               72
ff




     fi




                  fi




                       fi




                                            fi




                                                             fi




                                                                  fi




                                                                       fi




                                                                            fi




                                                                                 fi




                                                                                                      fi
     10.10 Combat Aftermath
     Aircraft returning from combat must use their remaining movement points to return to a
     suitable landing spot. Aircraft may not land in land zones captured or liberated in this Player
     Turn. Aircraft that are unable to reach a suitable landing spot are eliminated.

     Example: Great Britain is at war with Germany, but Neutral with Italy. There is a British Tactical
     Bomber in Gibraltar, a German Destroyer in sea zone M3, and an Italian Fighter on MAP in sea
     zone M2. It is Great Britain’s turn and the Tactical Bomber ies two spaces from Gibraltar and
     successfully attacks the German Destroyer in sea zone M3. At this moment, Italy declares war
     on Great Britain. As the Tactical Bomber is unable to nd a suitable landing spot, it is
     eliminated.

     After resolving combat in a land zone, if the Attacker has one or more surviving land units, he
     captures the land zone and takes Possession by placing his roundel (or removing the Enemy
     roundel if liberating an Originally possessed land zone). Remove Forti cations, Coastal
     Artillery, as well as any facility under construction. Adjust the industrial production points chart
     by the IPP value of the captured land zone. If multiple constituents from the British
     Commonwealth together conquer a land zone, Great Britain takes Possession. There are
     exceptions to the Attacker taking Possession (refer to 10.10.1 and 10.10.2).



     10.10.1 Liberation
     If a nation captures/liberates a land zone that Originally belonged to another Major Power of
     their Alliance it must immediately return it to its original owner. (Exception: When the original
     owner has surrendered).

     Example: If USA liberates a German-possessed Scotland, it would be immediately returned to
     Great Britain. If USA liberates a German-possessed Aquitaine, USA would keep it, as Free
     France is not a Major Power. As soon as Paris is liberated and Free France becomes France (a
     Major Power), Aquitaine would be immediately returned to France.

     A Major Power conquering a land zone in Chinese Home Country that it did not Originally own
     must immediately after conquest decide to either:
     • Keep it or
     • Give it to one of the Chinese factions. This requires that the two nations are Aligned or the
       conquering units are able to move to a Friendly land zone or naval transport in the
       subsequent Non-combat Movement Phase.

     A nation which has surrendered may not have land zones liberated.



     10.10.2 Capturing an Enemy Capital
     If a nation loses its Capital, the conquered player loses all possessed IPPs to the bank. The
       rst time in the game France surrenders to an Axis Power, the conquering player gets to keep
     all French-possessed IPPs as spoils of war.



     10.10.3 Relocating a Capital
     Great Britain, France, Free France, USA and USSR must relocate their Capital if it is captured.
     They may move it back to its original location on their turn if it is no longer Enemy-possessed.
     If having a Home Country, while their Capital is relocated, the new location is considered
     Home Country.



                                                                                                         73
fi




                                              fi




                                                    fl




                                                                fi
         Chapter 11 - Non-combat Movement Phase

11.1 Restrictions:
During Non-combat Movement Phase you may move your units that did not move during
combat movement (exception: 10.10.1 Liberation). You may not move into land zones or
through canals that were captured this Player Turn (exception: going in port (refer to 11.5)).

Militia can only start and end non-combat movement in Home Country.

11.2 Strategic Rail Movement:
Land, air and rocket units may move any distance using railroads. You have to Possess a land
zone since the beginning of the Player Turn before you can Strategic Rail move into the zone.

Regions of the map have di erent rail capacity de ned as the number of units each player can
Strategic Rail Move each Player Turn. Moving a unit across a regional boundary consumes rail
capacity in both regions.

Region                        Capacity            Region                       Capacity
North America                      4              Africa                           1
South America                      1              Middle East                      1
Europe                             4              Asia                             1
Soviet Union                       2




Aligned players can give permission for each other to Strategic Rail Move units into their land
zones.

Rivers can also be used for Strategic Rail Movement, but such use counts against the regional
rail capacity for the Player Turn. It is possible to combine railroads and rivers into one



                                                                                                 74
              ff




                                       fi
     Strategic Rail Movement. If a river travels between two land zones, one side may not be
     Enemy-possessed.



     11.2.1 Railroad Gauges:
     There are two types of railroad gauges - narrow and broad. A unit cannot Strategic Rail Move
     across a gauge-change without Improved Logistics technology.

     Example: Germany wants to Strategic Rail Move 3 units into USSR as close as possible to
     Kiev. Due to the reduced rail capacity in USSR and the gauge change, all units have to stop in
     Eastern Poland. Had the German player developed Improved Logistics technology, all three
     units could be Strategically Rail Moved into Kiev.



     11.3 Aircraft Non-combat Movement:

     Aircraft may:
     • Fly over controlled Minor Powers.
     • Fly over Enemy-possessed land and sea zones containing Enemy units if there are no
        Enemy ghters in that zone.

     Aircraft may not:
     • Fly over nations they are not at war with or Aligned with, except when crossing canals or
        straits.
     • Land in land zones which were captured or liberated this Player Turn.

     Aircraft move independently from Carriers during the Non-Combat Movement Phase (thus
     aircraft are not “carried” three sea zones by a Carrier, then y four more zones, or vice versa).

     An aircraft on MAP may opt to return to a land zone or Carrier using its MAP range during the
     Non-combat Movement Phase.



     11.3.1 Air Transporting Cargo:
     Air transports may transport land units (refer to 13.1.5). If an air transport is destroyed while
     carrying units, the units it carries are also destroyed. They may pick their cargo up before or
     during their non-combat move and continue to move up to their full movement points after
     they have unloaded their cargo in a Friendly-possessed land zone.

     You can transport Aligned members of your Alliance’s forces with your air transports. Such
     units would load on their Player Turn, move on your Player Turn and unload on their next
     Player Turn.



     11.4 Naval Non-combat Movement:
     Ships may freely ignore Submerged Enemy submarines when moving into a sea zone. Surface
     Ships may not move into a sea zone containing Enemy Surface Warships or Enemy aircraft on
     MAP.

     If moving Surface Ships into a sea zone containing non-Submerged Enemy submarines, the
     defending submarines may elect to engage all the Attacking player’s units in that sea
     zone. One round of combat occurs immediately. The Attacking player’s units use their attack
     values and the Defending player’s submarines use their defense values. After this single round



                                                                                                         75
fi




                                                     fl
     of combat, surviving ships may continue their movement. Their movement range and abilities
     are not a ected.

     If moving one or more submarines (without accompanying Surface Ships) into a sea zone
     containing Enemy ships (without an aircraft on MAP), the Submarines may ignore the ships
     and continue moving.

     Moving one or more submarines into a sea zone containing Enemy aircraft on MAP, the aircraft
     may elect to engage the submarines for one round of combat. Enemy Destroyers may also be
     paired during this combat with the submarines (exception: Advanced Submarines). Surviving
     submarines may continue moving. Their movement range and abilities are not a ected.

     Major Powers’ Surface ships without Naval Supply have -1 movement. For Capital Ships, this
     penalty is cumulative with the -1 movement penalty for being damaged.




     11.4.1 Naval Transporting Cargo:
     Naval transports may transport land units and Strategic Rockets. Naval transports may pick
     up units before or during their non-combat movement. This also includes while in port (refer to
     11.5). The units must not have moved before being picked up. A naval transport may unload
     its units in one or more adjacent land zones, but may not continue moving after unloading.
     Transported units may move no further after debarking. If a naval transport is eliminated the
     units it carries are also destroyed.

     You can transport Aligned members of your Alliance’s forces. Such units would load on their
     Player Turn, move on your Player Turn and unload on their next Player Turn.

     A naval transport cannot drop o 1 unit in the Combat Movement Phase, then another unit in
     the Non-Combat Movement Phase (refer to 10.8.3).



     11.4.2 Strategic Naval Movement
     Each nation can move a number of units using Strategic Naval Movement. The units that can
     be moved with Strategic Naval Movement are Naval Transports optionally loaded with land
     units and Strategic Rockets.

     A Nation’s Strategic Naval Movement capacity is the total number of units that can be moved.
     Each land unit, Strategic Rocket, or naval unit counts as one (so a naval transport carrying two
     units is 3 Strategic Naval Moves).

     Nation                       No. of Moves       Nation                      No. of Moves
     British Commonwealth              3 (+1*)       Italy                              3
     France                              3           Japan                           3 (+1**)
     Free French                         0           USSR                            2 (+1**)
     USA                               4 (+1*)       All others                         0
     Germany                             2




                                                                                                  76
ff




                       ff




                                                                        ff
      * Both British Commonwealth and USA begin ** Completing a strategic objective gives
      the game with a completed strategic objective Japan and USSR one additional Strategic
      that gives them one additional Strategic Naval Naval Movement.
      Movement.
      Strategic Naval Movement starts from the sea zone adjacent to a major Naval Facility and
      moves up to 4 sea zones in a Supply Path (refer to 1.11). This starting sea zone does not
      count, even if the naval transport started in port (refer to 11.5). It may not go through closed
      canals, closed straits, or into a zone that has Enemy Surface Warships, non-Submerged
      submarines or aircraft on MAP. Strategic Naval Movement cannot depart from an Enemy-
      occupied sea zone.

      The units must end their movement at a minor or major Friendly Naval Facility in a Supply
      Path. Units can be loaded up along the way, so long as they are also at an adjacent Friendly
      Naval Facility. Units can only be unloaded in the land zone containing the facility where the
      Strategic Naval Movement ended. After a Strategic Naval Movement the naval transport can
      only go in port in the Naval Facility where the Strategic Naval Movement ended.

      Note that Strategic Naval Movement has several exceptions to the standard rules for other
      movement:
      • Units moving via Strategic Naval Movement cannot move freely out of a sea zone
        containing Enemy units.
      • Units moving via Strategic Naval Movement may move into sea zones containing units from
        other Alliances with whom they are at peace during non-combat movement.
      • Nations at peace may not declare war on another Major Power to interdict Strategic Naval
        Movement.
      • Units carrying cargo from Aligned nations cannot be strategically naval moved.
      Example: A naval transport leaves port from Gibraltar to sea zone A44 carrying 1 Infantry. It
      traces a Supply Path via four sea zones (A46, A48, A51, A53), picking up another Infantry as it
      passes Sierra Leone. The two Infantry may remain on board the naval transport, or could be
      dropped o in St. Helena. They may not be unloaded in Southwest Africa as there is no
      destination Naval Facility adjacent to the sea zone.



      11.5 In Port
      Naval units may be designated as being “in port”. The in port designation happens in the end
      of the Non-combat Movement Phase, after movement (exceptions: ships built at Major
      Shipyards (refer to 12.1) and units being Lend-leased (refer to 12.4)). A unit can be designated
      in port, regardless of movement or combat conducted that Player Turn. (Note the exceptions
      after an amphibious assault (refer to 10.8.3) and after Strategic Naval Movement (refer to
      11.4.2)). When the unit is in port, place an in port marker underneath. Surface Warships must
      be taken o escort designation (refer to 9.4.5) and Battlecruisers must be taken o raiding
      designation (refer to 9.4.4) to be designated in port.

      If a land zone was captured in an amphibious assault, the units that were part of the shore
      bombardment or unloading of land units, can only be designated in port in a Naval Facility in
      that captured land zone (refer to 10.8.3).

      Surface Ships:
      When adjacent to an undamaged Friendly Major Port, Major Dockyard or Major Shipyard,
      Surface Ships can be designated as being in port. Carriers are only able to go in port without
      aircraft. Naval Transports are able to go in port with or without cargo. (Unloading is decided
      upon going in port. If cargo is unloaded, it cannot move for the rest of the Calendar Turn. Note:
      If carrying units from Aligned nations, these have to wait until their next Player Turn to unload.)




                                                                                                         77
ff




 ff




                                                                             ff
     Submarines:
     When adjacent to an undamaged Friendly Submarine Base, submarines can be designated as
     being in port.

     Example: Germany makes a successful amphibious assault on Northern Norway containing an
     undamaged Major Port. All Surface Ships that took part in the shore bombardment /
     amphibious assault may only go in port at the Major Port in Northern Norway. Surface Ships
     that took part in the screening force in the naval combat in sea zone A8 may go in port in any
     eligible facility.


     While In Port:

     • Although ships are located in the land zone, ships are considered to begin their movement
       in any adjacent sea zone for the purpose of tracking movement and range (i.e. moving out
       of port does not consume movement). If Surface Ships attempt to exit port into a blockaded
       sea zone, these blockading ships must be eliminated with a screening force (refer to 9.4.2)
       before further movement is possible.
     • Can only be attacked by aircraft carrying out port attacks (refer to 10.6.4).
     • Port attack combat occurs between attacking aircraft and defending Fighters and ships in
       port (ships defend at “0”).
     • Ports are protected by the facility’s inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery (if a facility has su ered
       maximum damage, its inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery does not o er protection).
     • If the facility is damaged, the Defender may immediately decide to move up to 3 ships out
       of the facility to an adjacent sea zone. Combat occurs with all Enemy units if there is an
       Enemy Surface Warship present. Ships electing to remain in a damaged facility cannot
       move until the facility is repaired.
     • Defender may scramble ships in port into combat in adjacent sea zones which has at least
       one Friendly defending unit.
     • If the land zone containing the Naval Facility is attacked, each Heavy Cruiser, Battlecruiser,
       Carrier and Battleship without a skeleton crew temporarily provides one Militia for the land
       combat, irrespective if the number of Militia exceeds the limit of what a Major Power can
       have in the zone. If such a Militia is taken as a casualty, the ship must remain in port for an
       entire Player Turn before it can be used. Place a “skeleton crew” marker underneath. Ships
       with skeleton crew may not move, scramble or take any other action until the end of their
       next Player Turn except for newly acquired Axis naval units moving after resolving Vichy
       (refer to 4.11.2). At the end of that Player Turn, the ship is reinforced at no cost. Remove the
       skeleton crew marker.
     • If the land zone containing the Naval Facility is captured, roll a D12 for each ship in the
       Place Units Phase (refer to 12.6).

     Example: Italian eet are in port in Northern Italy. The Italian player wishes to attack a British
      eet next to Gibraltar in M2, and combat moves via M3, to M2 for the attack. The Italian player
     retreats back to M3 after the rst combat round, and goes back in port in Northern Italy in the
     Non-combat Movement Phase. Note: Had the British eet been in sea zone M3, the Italian eet
     would not have been able to retreat and go back in port in Northern Italy.




                                                                                                     78
fl




        fl




                      fi




                                              fl




                                                        ff




                                                                             ff




                                                                                     fl
                     Chapter 12 - Place Units Phase

12.1 Place Units and Facilities:
Place units and facilities from the build queue place units box. Place facilities where they were
started (i.e. where there is an Under Construction marker). If you cannot place a unit or facility
due to a DoW during your Player Turn that a ects your Supply Path, it remains in the place
units box until the next Player Turn. When placing units and facilities the following apply:

• Land units or aircraft must be placed at a factory in a Supply Path with available capacity
  (refer to 13.2.1) which you have possessed since the beginning of the Player Turn. (May be
  interdicted, refer to 12.5).
• Naval units must be placed at a shipyard in a Supply Path with available capacity which you
  have possessed since the beginning of the Player Turn. Capital Ships must be placed at a
  Major Shipyard in a Supply Path with available capacity which you have possessed since
  the beginning of the Player Turn.
• Facilities must be placed in a land zone which you have possessed since the beginning of
  the Player Turn.
• A newly upgraded factory is not able to utilize its increased capacity until the next Player
  Turn.
• Surface Ships built at Major Shipyards may be placed in port (refer to 11.5).
• Militia are not built via factories. The number of Militia you may place in a land zone is equal
  to the land zone's IPP value with a minimum of one (even if the land zone has no IPP value).
  This limitation does not apply to recruitment rolls (refer to 12.7). You may place a maximum
  of 1 per Player Turn in non-Originally owned land zones. You must have possessed the land
  zone since the beginning of the Player Turn. Note that outside Home Country, the maximum
  number of Militia a Major Power can have in a land zone is equal to the IPP value of the
  zone, minimum of one. In Home Country there is no limit.
• Colonial Infantry are not built via factories. Colonial Infantry must be placed in land zones
  with a IPP value outside of Home Country. The maximum number which may be built per
  Player Turn in a land zone is equal to the land zone’s IPP value. The land zone must be
  Originally possessed. You must have possessed the land zone since the beginning of the
  Player Turn. Note that Colonial Infantry, like other specialty infantry, is limited to a maximum
  of two purchased per Player Turn.

CCP and KMT have a “Decentralized Production” special ability, refer to their reference
sheets.

Example: A Major Factory has 3 damage. The owner paid for a full repair in the Production
Phase. In the Place Unit Phase the owner is only able to place 2 units at this factory.

Example: Japan has a production capacity of 9. In the Production Phase, Japan buys 9
Infantry. During the Combat Movement Phase, Japan declares war on British Commonwealth,
who has a Submarine in sea zone P14. In the Place Units Phase, Japan must attempt to place
1 Infantry in Rehe and risk interdiction.



12.2 Repair:
Remove damage markers from repaired cities and facilities.

Damaged Capital Ships that have been at a Friendly dockyard or shipyard since the beginning
of the Player Turn are now repaired (up to the available repair capacity (refer to 13.2.4 and
13.2.5)).

Ships that have been in port with skeleton crew since the beginning of the Player Turn are now
reinforced.

                                                                                                79
                               ff
12.3 Upgrades:
Upgrading requires a Supply Path to the land zone that the unit or facility receiving the
upgrade is in. A unit that has moved/attacked can be upgraded in the same Player Turn. If the
upgrade cannot reach a suitable unit (due to casualties or units moving outside a Supply
Path), the upgrade remains on the build queue until a Supply Path exists to a suitable unit in a
future Place Units Phase.

A unit cannot be upgraded the same Player Turn it is placed on the board.


12.4 Lend-lease Delivery:
You must start the Lend-lease delivery in your Home Country. The Lend-lease must then move
along a Supply Path (refer to 1.11) to a land zone in the receiving nation’s Home Country. In
other instances when tracing a Supply Path, you are only allowed to trace via naval facilities
possessed by you or a Controlled/Aligned nation. However, when delivering Lend-lease, the
naval facility at the nal destination will be possessed by the receiving nation. All other naval
facilities used to trace the Supply Path must be possessed, Controlled, or Aligned. All naval
facilities used must be undamaged and possessed since the beginning of the Player Turn.
Lend-lease units have no combat value during delivery. While traveling to its destination, the
lend-leased unit is possessed by the sending nation. The Lend-lease stops in the rst land
zone in the receiving player’s possessed Home Country. Upon arrival at its destination, lend-
leased sculpts may be replaced by the corresponding receiving nation’s sculpts. Lend-leased
bases and Militia upgrades are moved to the recipients place units box on the build queue to
be placed anywhere in their Home Country in their next Place Units Phase. Naval units can be
delivered in port. Naval units cannot be delivered via land.

Interdiction:
If the route passes through a sea zone with interdicting units, the Lend-lease may possibly be
eliminated (refer to 12.5).

Blockade:
A blockaded Naval Facility cannot send nor receive Lend-lease (refer to 9.4.6).

Failure to Deliver:
Lend-lease that cannot be delivered must wait on the build queue and be attempted again on
the next Player Turn.


12.5 Interdiction
Supply Paths can be interdicted if they pass through a sea zone that contains either:
• A non-Submerged submarine
• A Battlecruiser designated as a raider
• An aircraft on MAP
They can also be interdicted if they cross a narrow crossing with an Enemy Coastal Artillery.

Enemy units interdict; neutral eligible units may elect to interdict. A nation may not interdict a
lend-lease delivery in route to itself.




                                                                                                 80
      fi




                                                                        fi
Diplomatic relations for the interdicting nation:

                   At Peace With Sending Nation               At War With Sending Nation
                   At Full Production or
Prerequisites currently engaged in a civil war with                          None
                   the receiving nation.
                   Sending nation gets a 1D6 income
If Successful      increase (cannot exceed Full                              None
                   Production).

For each sea zone where the delivery is interdicted, it is subject to interdiction die rolls. There
are no die modi ers. If it scores a hit the delivery is eliminated.

The unit/facility attempting interdiction rolls a D12 using its attack values. If the interdicting
player has developed Advanced Submarines technology, interdicting submarines double their
attack values (i.e. a regular Submarine would hit on a “6” or less). After the attacker’s
interdiction roll, ships designated as escorts get one defensive roll against each interdicting
submarine and aircraft on MAP.

Example: Germany and Great Britain are at war. There is a German non-Submerged Submarine
in the Supply Path for Great Britain’s Minor Factory in Cape Town. If the British player decides
to place units in that facility, and the delivery is interdicted, the unit the British player wanted to
place at the Minor Factory is eliminated.

Example: The Spanish Republicans want to interdict German Lend-lease to the Spanish
Nationalists arriving in Galicia and León. They move their Coastal Submarine to sea zone A28
and in the next turn successfully interdict German Lend-lease. As Germany’s income level is
already at Full Production, Germany does not get an income increase.

Example: Great Britain has developed Improved Factories technology and wishes to produce
two units in its Minor Factory in Cape Town. An Enemy submarine successfully interdicts the
Supply Path eliminating both units.



12.6 Ships Captured in Port:
If conquering a land zone containing a Naval Facility with ships in port, roll a D12 for each
ship:

       Dice #         Event
        1-9           Scuttled; Remove from game.
       10-12          Captured by Attacking player.

The ship is captured in its current state regarding damage and/or skeleton crew.




                                                                                                    81
  fi
          12.7 Recruitment Rolls:
          Controlled Minor Powers (e.g. Abyssinia, Dadao Government, Mongolia, Nationalist Spain,
          Republican Spain, Siam and Vichy) make recruitment rolls. A recruitment roll is a D12. On a
          result that is equal to or less than the number of land zones that controlled nation Possesses*,
          you get either:

          • 1 Infantry** or 2 Militia to place in land zones possessed by that controlled nation since the
            beginning of the Player Turn or
          • Advancement of 1 ship on the controlled nation’s build queue or
          • 1 full facility repair
          * O shore land zones do not count towards the number of land zones, except for Corsica
          (Vichy) and factions during an ongoing Spanish Civil War.

          ** Vichy gets 1 Foreign Legion to place in a land zone with a IPP value it has possessed since
          the beginning of the Player Turn.



          12.8 In uence Rolls:
          Eligible nations roll for in uence (refer to 15.2 and 15.4).



          12.9 Collect Income:
          The Attacking player collects income. Note that some nations (British Commonwealth, France,
          USA, and USSR) start with a lower income that can gradually increase via income increases
          (refer to 5.2). The Axis nations begin at Full Production income and do not have income
          increases. Once a nation is at war with a Major Power, it also begins collecting Wartime
          Bonus Income (refer to 5.3). Controlled Minor Powers do not get IPP income (Exception: Vichy,
          refer to 4.11.3).



          12.10 End of Player Turn:
          Remove IPP loss trackers on the Attacking Player's convoy lines.



          12.11 End of Round:
          Once the USA player has collected income, it is the end of the round. If the Molotov-
          Ribbentrop Pact is in e ect, Germany receives 5 IPP and USSR receives 3 IPP and 1
          technology roll, simultaneously (refer to 6.4). Beginning July, 1944, the game end die roll is
          made (refer to 3.4). If the game continues, move the calendar marker on the top of the IPP
          tracking chart to the next turn.




                                                                                                           82
ff




     fl




                    ff




                         fl
                   Chapter 13 - Units and Facilities

13.1 Units:

13.1.1 Infantry-class Units:
An infantry-class unit may pair with an artillery-class unit on a 1:1 ratio to give the paired
infantry-class unit a +1 attack bonus. When defending in an unsurrounded city, infantry-class
units get +1 defense bonus on all rounds of combat and Target Selection at “1” versus
vehicle-class units. Forti cations add +2 defense bonus to all infantry-class units on the rst
round of combat (refer to 13.2.6). Infantry-class units may participate in the rst round of an
amphibious assault (refer to 10.8.3). Infantry-class units may non-combat move across narrow
crossings (with some restrictions, refer to 1.9).


                     A    D    M     $ Notes
Militia            N/A    2    (1)   2 Are not built via factories. The maximum number
                                         which may be placed in a land zone per Player
                                         Turn is equal to the land zone’s IPP value with a
                                         minimum of 1 (even if the land zone has no IPP
                                         value). Maximum of 1 per Player Turn in non-
                                         Originally owned land zones. You must have
                                         possessed the land zone since the beginning of
                                         the Player Turn. Note that the maximum number of
                                         Militia a Major Power can have in a land zone that
                                         is outside of Home Country is equal to the IPP
                                         value of the zone, with a minimum of 1. In Home
                                         Country, there is no limit.

                                         Movement of 1 in Major Power’s Home Country.
                                         (Must start and end movement in Home Country).

                                         May not be used for attacking (exception: USSR’s
                                         “For the Motherland!” special ability).

                                         Can be upgraded to Infantry for 2 IPP (maximum
                                         of 2 upgrades per Player Turn, requires a Supply
                                         Path).
Infantry             2    4     1    3   Can be upgraded to Motorized Infantry for 1 IPP
                                         (refer to 13.1.2).
Airborne            2*    2     1    3   Purchase maximum of 2 per Player Turn.
Infantry
                                         May conduct an airborne assault from either a
                                         strategic bomber or air transport (refer to 10.6.1).

                                         * If conducting an airborne assault, Airborne
                                         Infantry attack at “3” on the first round only.
Elite Airborne       3    3     1    3   Replace Airborne Infantry after developing
                                         Airborne Doctrine technology. Purchase maximum
Infantry
                                         of 2 per Player Turn.

                                         Function as Airborne Infantry. May conduct an
                                         airborne assault from either a strategic bomber or
                                         air transport (refer to 10.6.1).




                                                                                                83
           fi




                                                               fi




                                                                             fi
                           A        D         M   $ Notes
     Marines               2        4         1   4 Purchase maximum of 2 per Player Turn.
                                                      Does not su er double casualties on the rst
                                                      round of combat as the Attacker in an amphibious
                                                      assault (refer to 10.8.3). Does not su er the -1
                                                      penalty on the rst round for an attack across a
                                                      river (refer to 1.7.6). Can combat move across
                                                      narrow crossings (with some restrictions, refer to
                                                      1.9). Gain +1 attack bonus when attacking from
                                                      Attack Naval Transports.
     Mountain              2        4         1   4   Purchase maximum of 2 per Player Turn.
     Infantry
                                                      Provide +1 defense bonus in mountains. No attack
                                                      penalty from mountains.
     Colonial              2        4         1   4   Available to the following Major Powers: ANZAC,
                                                      FEC, France, Great Britain and Italy. Purchase
     Infantry
                                                      maximum of 2 per Player Turn. Are not built via
                                                      factories. Must be placed in Originally possessed
                                                      land zones with a IPP value outside Home
                                                      Country. The maximum number which may be
                                                      built per Player Turn in a land zone is equal to the
                                                      land zone’s IPP value. None may be built if the
                                                      land zone has no IPP value.

                                                      Can be upgraded to Motorized Infantry for 1 IPP
                                                      (refer to 13.1.2).
     Foreign Legion        2        4         1   4   Available to France, Free France & Vichy.
                                                      Purchase maximum of 2 per Player Turn. Are not
                                                      built via factories. Must be placed in land zones
                                                      with an IPP value you have possessed since the
                                                      beginning of the Player Turn.

                                                      Function as Mountain Infantry, but are una ected
                                                      by desert combat rules, and have +1 attack bonus
                                                      in desert.
     Gurkhas               2        4         1   4   Available to FEC if Nepal is neutral or British
                                                      Commonwealth-possessed. Purchase maximum
                                                      of 2 per Player Turn. Are not built via factories.
                                                      Must be placed in land zones bordering the
                                                      Himalayas FEC has possessed since the
                                                      beginning of the Player Turn.

                                                      Function as Mountain Infantry, and have +1 attack
                                                      bonus in jungle.



     13.1.2 Vehicle-class Units:
     All vehicle-class units have -2 attack penalty in cities, except when the city is surrounded.
     All vehicle-class units have -2 attack/defense penalty in jungles and marshes.




                                                                                                             84
ff




      fi




                               ff




                                    fi




                                         ff
                     A    D     M   $ Notes
Cavalry              3    2     2   3 No movement penalty from mountains.
                                        Not available for purchase to Major Powers after
                                        July, 1939.
Motorized            2    4     2   4   Can tow Artillery and Anti-aircraft Artillery when
                                        paired on a 1:1 ratio. Must start in the same zone.
Infantry
                                        Only 2 Motorized Infantry can be created from
                                        upgraded infantry per turn.
Mechanized           3    4     2   4   Available to Germany in July, 1938. Available to all
                                        other Major Powers in January, 1940.
Infantry
                                        May pair with blitzing armor on a 1:1 ratio (refer to
                                        10.5.1).
Advanced             4    5     2   4   Available after developing Advanced Mechanized
                                        Infantry technology.
Mechanized
Infantry                                Function as Mechanized infantry, but may pair with
                                        blitzing armor on a 2:1 ratio (refer to 10.5.1).
Panzer-              4    5     2   4   Available to Germany after developing Advanced
                                        Mechanized Infantry technology. Purchase
grenadiers
                                        maximum of 2 per Player Turn. Must be placed in
                                        German Home Country.

                                        May blitz on their own without pairing with blitzing
                                        armor (refer to 10.5.1).
Tank Destroyers 3[3] 4[3]       2   4   Available to Germany in July, 1938. Available to all
                                        other Major Powers in January, 1940. Purchase
                                        maximum of 2 per Player Turn.

                                        Target Selection at “1-3” (versus vehicle-class).
Light Armor          3    1     2   4   May blitz.

Medium Armor         6    5     2   6 Available to Germany in July, 1938. Available to all
                                        other Major Powers in January, 1940.

                                        May blitz.
T-34’s              6[1] 5[1]   2   5 Available to USSR after developing Improved
                                        Factories technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per
                                        Player Turn. Must be placed in Soviet Home
                                        Country.

                                        May blitz. Function as Medium Armor, but with
                                        Target Selection at “1” (versus vehicle-class).
Heavy Armor         8[1] 7[1]   2   7   Available after developing Heavy Armor
                                        technology.

                                        May blitz. Target Selection at “1” (versus vehicle-
                                        class).
Tiger I’s           8[3] 7[3]   2   7   Available to Germany after developing Heavy
                                        Armor technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per
                                        Player Turn. Must be placed in German Home
                                        Country.

                                        May blitz. Function as Heavy Armor, but with
                                        Target Selection at “1-3” (versus vehicle-class).
[X] = Target Selection
                                                                                                85
13.1.3 Artillery-class Units:
Artillery-class units have the rst strike ability on the rst round of combat (refer to 10.2). An
artillery-class unit may pair with an infantry-class unit on a 1:1 ratio to give the paired infantry-
class unit a +1 attack bonus. Artillery-class units do not su er the -1 attack penalty on the rst
round of combat for an attack across a river (refer to 1.7.6). Artillery-class units are minus -1 in
attack/defense if not paired 1:1 with infantry-class or vehicle-class units.

Example: An army consisting of 10 artillery-class and 6 infantry-class units are attacked. 4 of
the 10 artillery-class units defend at -1. In the rst combat round, 3 of the defending infantry-
class units are taken as casualties. In the second combat round, 7 of the 10 artillery-class units
now defend at -1.


                         A     D   M    $ Notes
Artillery                3     3   1    4 Movement of 2 when paired 1:1 with Motorized
                                                 Infantry.
Self-propelled           3     3   2    5        May pair with blitzing armor on a 1:1 ratio (refer to
Artillery                                        10.5.1).
Advanced                  4    4   1    4        Available after developing Advanced Artillery
Artillery                {2}                     technology.

                                                 Function as Artillery, but with an attrition attack
                                                 versus adjacent land zone at “2” (refer to
                                                 10.5.3). Movement of 2 when paired 1:1 with
                                                 Motorized Infantry. May engage in strategic
                                                 bombing of cities (refer to 10.6.2), doing 1D6
                                                 damage.
Advanced                  4    4   2    5        Available after developing Advanced Artillery
Self-propelled           {2}                     technology.
Artillery
                                                 Function as Self-propelled Artillery, but with an
                                                 attrition attack versus adjacent land zone at “2”
                                                 (refer to 10.5.3). May pair with blitzing armor on a
                                                 1:1 ratio (refer to 10.5.1). May engage in strategic
                                                 bombing of cities (refer to 10.6.2), doing 1D6
                                                 damage.
Katyusha Rocket 5              4   2    5        Available to USSR after developing Advanced
Artillery       {2}                              Artillery technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per
                                                 Player Turn. Must be placed in Soviet Home
                                                 Country.

                                                 Function as Self-propelled Artillery, but with an
                                                 attrition attack versus adjacent land zone at “2”
                                                 (refer to 10.5.3). May pair with blitzing armor on a
                                                 1:1 ratio (refer to 10.5.1). May engage in strategic
                                                 bombing of cities (refer to 10.6.2), doing 1D6
                                                 damage.
{X} = Attrition attack




                                                                                                         86
                fi




                                   fi




                                            fi




                                                     ff




                                                                                        fi
13.1.4 Anti-aircraft Artillery-class Units:

                       A       D   M        $ Notes
Anti-aircraft              3   3   1        4   Provide 1 shot per aircraft in the first combat
                                                round only, up to maximum 3 shots.
Artillery
                                                Movement of 2 when paired 1:1 with Motorized
                                                Infantry.



13.1.5 Aircraft Units:
Aircraft units do not su er terrain e ects, except if defending in (not scrambling to) a city
which is surrounded (refer to 1.7.7). Aircraft units must be selected rst if Enemy aircraft with
the air superiority ability cause casualties on the rst round of combat. Some aircraft may be
assigned on MAP, but have a reduced range for MAP (refer to 9.3.1).

                      A        D   M        $ Notes
Fighters              6    6    4 10 Have air superiority ability (refer to 10.2). May
                     (3*) (3*) {1}   intercept at reduced combat values (refer to
                                     10.6.3). May pair with blitzing armor on a 1:1 ratio
                                     (refer to 10.5.1). May engage in port attacks (refer
                                     to 10.6.4).
Jet Fighters          8    8    4 11 Available after developing Jet Fighters technology.
                     (5*) (5*) {1}   Purchase maximum of 2 per Player Turn.

                                    Function as Fighters. Have air superiority ability
                                    (refer to 10.2). May intercept at reduced combat
                                    values (refer to 10.6.3). May pair with blitzing
                                    armor on a 1:1 ratio (refer to 10.5.1). May engage
                                    in port attacks (refer to 10.6.4).
Tactical            7[3] 5[3] 4 10 Target Selection at “1-3” (versus land/naval units).
                              {1}   May pair with blitzing armor on a 1:1 ratio (refer to
Bombers
                                    10.5.1). May engage in port attacks (refer to
                                    10.6.4). May engage in convoy raiding with a +1
                                    modifier (refer to 10.9).
Medium               7    4    5 10 May engage in strategic bombing (refer to 10.6.2),
                    (1*) (1*) {1}   doing 1D6 damage. May engage in port attacks
Bombers
                                    (refer to 10.6.4). Gain +1 MAP range if owner has
                                    developed Long-range Aircraft technology. May
                                    engage in convoy raiding with a +1 modifier (refer
                                    to 10.9).




                                                                                                  87
         ff




                      ff




                                       fi




                                                            fi
                  A    D     M     $ Notes
Strategic        3@2 2       6     10 Available to Germany in July, 1938. Available to all
                 (1*) (1*)             other Major Powers in January, 1940. Purchase
Bombers
                                       maximum of 2 per Player Turn.

                                      Can carry 1 airborne infantry to conduct an
                                      airborne assault (refer to 10.6.1). May engage in
                                      strategic bombing (refer to 10.6.2), doing 2D6
                                      damage. When conducting strategic bombing,
                                      may be targeted for one round of interception
                                      combat at reduced combat values (refer to 10.6.3).
                                      Capable of performing carpet bombing against
                                      land units, 3D12 at “2”, after developing Heavy
                                      Strategic Bombers technology (refer to 10.6.5).
Heavy            5@2 3       7     11 Available after developing Heavy Strategic
                 (2*) (2*)            Bombers technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per
Strategic
                                      Player Turn.
Bombers
                                      Function as Strategic Bombers. Can carry 1
                                      airborne infantry to conduct an airborne assault
                                      (refer to 10.6.1). May engage in strategic bombing
                                      (refer to 10.6.2), doing 3D6 damage. When
                                      conducting strategic bombing, may be targeted
                                      for one round of interception combat at reduced
                                      combat values (refer to 10.6.3). Capable of
                                      performing carpet bombing against land units,
                                      5D12 at “2” (refer to 10.6.5).
B-29             5@2 3       8     11 Available to USA after developing Heavy Strategic
                 (2*) (2*)            Bombers technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per
                                      Player Turn. Must be placed in USA Home
                                      Country.

                                       Function as Heavy Strategic Bombers. Can carry 1
                                       airborne infantry to conduct an airborne assault
                                       (refer to 10.6.1). May engage in strategic bombing
                                       (refer to 10.6.2), doing 3D6 damage. When
                                       conducting strategic bombing, may be targeted
                                       for one round of interception combat at reduced
                                       combat values (refer to 10.6.3). Capable of
                                       performing carpet bombing against land units,
                                       5D12 at “2” (refer to 10.6.5).
Seaplanes         3    3      6    7   Can only hit submarines and naval transports
                             {2}       (refer to 10.6). May engage in port attacks (refer to
                                       10.6.4). Gain +2 attack on MAP against
                                       submarines if owner has developed Anti-
                                       submarine Warfare technology. Gain +1 MAP
                                       range if owner has developed Long-range Aircraft
                                       technology and if starting from a Seaplane Base.
                                       May engage in convoy raiding with a +1 modifier
                                       (refer to 10.9).
Air Transports   N/A N/A     6     8   Can carry 1 airborne infantry to conduct an
                                       airborne assault (refer to 10.6.1). Can carry 1
                                       infantry-class unit in non-combat movement.
                                       Must be the last units selected as casualties,
                                       except on the rst round of combat as the
                                       Attacker when participating in an airborne assault.



                                                                                               88
fi
                     A          D   M    $ Notes
Heavy Air          N/A N/A          6    9 Available after developing Airborne Doctrine
                                             technology.
Transports
                                             Function as Air Transports, but can carry 2
                                             airborne infantry to conduct one airborne assault
                                             (refer to 10.6.1). Can carry 1 Artillery, 1 Anti-aircraft
                                             Artillery, or 1 infantry-class unit in non-combat
                                             movement. Must be the last units selected as
                                             casualties, except on the rst round of combat as
                                             the Attacker when participating in an airborne
                                             assault.
(X) = Interception combat value
[X] = Target Selection
{X} = MAP range

* If Radar technology developed: +1 interception.



13.1.6 Naval Units:
Naval units may be designated as being in port, which enables scrambling (refer to
11.5). Surface Warships may be designated as escorts (refer to 9.4.5). Three or more Surface
Warships in a sea zone without Enemy units automatically blockade all Enemy Supply Paths in
that sea zone, and all Naval Facilities adjacent to that sea zone (refer to 9.4.6).

Surface ships (excluding Battlecruisers designated as a raider) without Naval Supply have -1
movement.


                     A          D M      $    Notes
Torpedo Boat         2          2   2 N/A Cannot be built.
Destroyers
Destroyers           4          4   3    7  May engage submarines (but not Advanced
                                            Submarines) if paired 1:1 with an aircraft on MAP
                                            (refer to 9.3.1). Negate submarines’ first strike.
Coastal               4         6   1   N/A Cannot be built.
Defense Ships        (2)
                                              May provide shore bombardment with rst strike
                                              in an amphibious assault (refer to 10.8.2).
Light Cruisers        5          5 3     9    Target Selection at “1-3” (versus aircraft).
                     [3]        [3]
Heavy Cruisers        6          6 3    5/5 May provide shore bombardment with rst strike
                     (2)                      in an amphibious assault (refer to 10.8.2). If the
                                              land zone containing the berthing Naval Facility is
                                              attacked while in port, provide one Militia for the
                                              land combat (refer to 11.5).




                                                                                                         89
            fi




                           fi
                           fi
                      A     D M      $    Notes
     Battlecruisers    7    7   3   7/7 May provide shore bombardment with first strike
                      (3)              in an amphibious assault (refer to 10.8.2). May be
                                       designated as raiders with the ability to slip
                                       through, slip away, and conduct convoy raiding
                                       with a +2 modifier (refer to 9.4.4). If the land zone
                                       containing the berthing Naval Facility is attacked
                                       while in port, provide one Militia for the land
                                       combat (refer to 11.5). Has Target Selection
                                       versus naval units if attacked while designated as
                                       a raider (refer to 10.7).
     Battleships       8    8 2 6/6/6 Capital Ships. Require 2 hits to sink. Sustaining
                      (4)              damage reduces movement by 1, and combat
                                       effectiveness by 2 (see battle board). Damage
                                       may be repaired at a Friendly dockyard or
                                       shipyard (refer to 8.6). May provide shore
                                       bombardment with first strike in an amphibious
                                       assault (10.8.2). If the land zone containing the
                                       berthing Naval Facility is attacked while in port,
                                       provide one Militia for the land combat (refer to
                                       11.5).
     Heavy            10    10 3 7/7/7 Available after developing Large Ship
                      (5)              Construction technology.
     Battleships
                                        Capital Ships. Require 3 hits to sink. Sustaining
                                        damage reduces reduces movement by 1, and
                                        combat e ectiveness by 2 (see battle board).
                                        Damage may be repaired at a Friendly dockyard
                                        or shipyard (refer to 8.6). May provide shore
                                        bombardment with rst strike in an amphibious
                                        assault (10.8.2). If the land zone containing the
                                        berthing Naval Facility is attacked while in port,
                                        provide one Militia for the land combat (refer to
                                        11.5).
     Light Carriers   N/A   1   3 4/4 Carry 1 Fighter/Tactical Bomber. Defending
                                        aircraft on Carriers may always act as if on MAP
                                        (refer to 9.3.1). If the land zone containing the
                                        berthing Naval Facility is attacked while in port,
                                        provides one Militia for the land combat (refer to
                                        11.5).
     Fleet Carriers   N/A   2   3 5/5/5 Capital Ships. Require 2 hits to sink. Sustaining
                                        damage reduces movement by 1, and combat
                                        effectiveness by 1 (refer to battle board). Damage
                                        may be repaired at a Friendly dockyard or
                                        shipyard (refer to 8.6). Carry 2 Fighters/Tactical
                                        Bombers. Defending aircraft on Carriers may
                                        always act as if on MAP (refer to 9.3.1). If the land
                                        zone containing the berthing Naval Facility is
                                        attacked while in port, provides one Militia for the
                                        land combat (refer to 11.5).




                                                                                                90
ff




          fi
                         A     D M      $   Notes
     Heavy Fleet         N/A   2   3 6/6/6 Available after developing Large Ship
                                            Construction technology.
     Carriers
                                           Capital Ships. Require 2 hits to sink. Sustaining
                                           damage reduces movement by 1, and combat
                                           effectiveness by 1 (refer to battle board). Damage
                                           may be repaired at a Friendly dockyard or
                                           shipyard (refer to 8.6). Carry 3 Fighters/Tactical
                                           Bombers or 1 Medium Bomber and 1 Fighter or 1
                                           Tactical Bomber. Fighters may intercept/scramble
                                           if Radar technology developed. Defending aircraft
                                           on Carriers may always act as if on MAP (refer to
                                           9.3.1). If the land zone containing the berthing
                                           Naval Facility is attacked while in port, provides
                                           one Militia for the land combat (refer to 11.5).
     Coastal             2[1] 2[1] 1   N/A Cannot be built.
     Submarines
                                            Function as Submarines. Target Selection versus
                                            Surface Ships at “1”. Have rst strike unless the
                                            Enemy has a Destroyer present. May engage in
                                            convoy raiding with a +1 modi er (refer to 10.9).
                                            Can only be attacked during the Attacker’s
                                            Combat Phase by an aircraft on MAP (potentially
                                            with a paired Destroyer, refer to 10.7) or while in
                                            port (refer to 11.5). If Enemy Surface Ships enter
                                            its sea zone, may choose to attack the moving
                                              eet for one round of combat (refer to 9.1). May
                                            never cause a hit to aircraft. May move through
                                            closed straits, but not closed canals.
     Submarines          3[1] 3[1] 3    6   Target Selection versus Surface Ships at
                                            “1”. Have first strike unless the Enemy has a
                                            Destroyer present. May engage in convoy raiding
                                            with a +2 modifier (refer to 10.9). Can only be
                                            attacked during the Attacker’s Combat Phase by
                                            an aircraft on MAP (potentially with a paired
                                            Destroyer, refer to 10.7) or while in port (refer to
                                            11.5). If Enemy Surface Ships enter its sea zone,
                                            may choose to attack the moving fleet for one
                                            round of combat (refer to 9.1). May never cause a
                                            hit to aircraft. May move through closed straits,
                                            but not closed canals.
     Advanced            4[1] 4[1] 3    7   Available after developing Advanced Submarines
                                            technology.
     Submarines
                                            Function as Submarines. Target Selection versus
                                            Surface Ships at “1”. Have first strike unless the
                                            Enemy has a Destroyer present. May engage in
                                            convoy raiding with a +4 modifier (refer to 10.9).
                                            Can only be attacked during the Attacker’s
                                            Combat Phase by an aircraft on MAP (refer to
                                            10.7) or while in port (refer to 11.5). If Enemy
                                            Surface Ships enter its sea zone, may choose to
                                            attack the moving fleet for one round of combat
                                            (refer to 9.1). May never cause a hit to aircraft.
                                            May move through closed straits, but not closed
                                            canals.


                                                                                                   91
fl




               fi




                    fi
                      A     D M       $    Notes
Naval                N/A N/A 2        7    Carry 2 infantry-class units or 1 infantry-class +
                                           another type of land unit or Strategic Rocket.
Transports
Attack Naval         N/A     1   2    7    Available after developing Amphibious Doctrine
                                           technology.
Transports
                                           Function as Naval Transports, but Marines gain
                                           +1 attack and all land units can participate in an
                                           amphibious assault from the first combat round.
(X) = Shore bombardment
[X] = Target Selection



13.1.7 Rocket Units:
Rockets cannot move and re the same turn.

                      A     D    M     $ Notes
Strategic            N/A N/A     1     3 Available after developing Strategic Rockets
                                           technology. Purchase maximum of 2 per Player
Rockets
                                           Turn.

                                           May engage in strategic bombing of facilities (refer
                                           to 10.6.2), doing 1D6 damage at a range of 3. Is
                                           destroyed after a single use. Cannot be
                                           intercepted. Cannot be targeted by Anti-aircraft
                                           Artillery unless the Defender has developed Radar
                                           technology. Cannot be taken as a casualty.

                                           Have no attack or defense value in normal combat
                                           and cannot be taken as casualties. They are
                                           eliminated if they are ever alone in a zone with an
                                           Enemy land unit.


13.2 Facilities:
Cities can only contain one minor and one major Naval Facility.
Facilities may grant a +1 movement bonus depending on where units start their movement:
• Aircraft other than seaplanes: in the same land zone as the Airbase.
• Seaplanes: in the same land zone as the Seaplane Base and only if the rst sea zone
   entered is adjacent to this base.
• Submarines: in a sea zone adjacent to a Submarine Base in a Supply Path.
• Surface Ships: in a sea zone adjacent to a major Naval Facility in a Supply Path.


13.2.1 Factories:
Factories represent the industrial production capacity of a land zone. There are three types of
factories: Minor Factories, Medium Factories and Major Factories.
All have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery that defend against strategic bombing. The inherent
Anti-aircraft Artillery of factories are never eliminated or taken as casualties. Factories do not
have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery while being constructed.



                                                                                                  92
              fi




                                                             fi
                           Minor Factories        Medium Factories         Major Factories
Price                               8                      7/7                    6/6/6
Upgrade                   To Medium Factory: 7     To Major Factory: 6            N/A
                          Any possessed land
Where                                                            Home Country only
                                 zone
Capacity                          1 unit                  3 units                 5 units
Capacity, Improved               2 units                  5 units                 8 units
                                                                           Can produce 1 unit
Use if Damaged             Useless if damaged      Useless if damaged
                                                                            less per damage
Maximum Damage                      5                       10                       20
Technology
                                   No                       No                     Yes
Development
Cost to repair                                  1 IPP per damage point

A Minor Factory outside Home Country needs a Supply Path. If this Supply Path is absent,
blockaded or interdicted, the Minor Factory cannot produce any units.

A zone can contain more than one factory. The Player Turn a factory is built/captured it
cannot produce anything. The Player Turn a factory is upgraded or repaired its
production is limited to the production capacity it had at the start of the Player Turn. If
captured, Medium and Major Factories are downgraded to a Minor Factory. The
factory is captured in its current state regarding damage and in this particular
situation, the maximum damage the factory may sustain is dependent on the factory’s
original level. If repossessed by the original owner, the factory reverts to its original
level in its current state of damage.


13.2.2 Bases:
There are three types of bases: Airbases, Seaplane Bases, and Submarine Bases. These have
some common features:

• Use: You can use it if you have possessed it since the beginning of your Player Turn or if
  you are Aligned to the nation that Possesses it.
• Anti-aircraft: All have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery that defend against strategic bombing.
  The inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery of bases are never eliminated or taken as casualties. They
  do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery while being constructed.
• Movement Bonus: A Supply Path is required. Having multiple bases of the same type does
  not provide a cumulative movement bonus.

                                Airbases          Seaplane Bases          Submarine Bases
Price                              3/3                     3                         3
Upgrade                                                    N/A
                             Any possessed       On the border between any possessed land
Where                          land zone               zone and one or two sea zones

Bases per zone                    Max 1                             Unlimited




                                                                                                    93
                                    Airbases             Seaplane Bases        Submarine Bases
                                                         Seaplanes +1
                                    Aircraft +1
                                                      Seaplanes MAP+1
                                    (excluding
     Movement Bonus                                 after developing Long-        Submarines +1
                                    Seaplanes)
                                                         range Aircraft
                                                           technology

     Scramble                    Up to 3 Fighters        Up to 3 Seaplanes      Up to 3 submarines

     Scramble with Radar Unlimited Fighters Unlimited Seaplanes Unlimited submarines

     Able to be in port                N/A                     N/A                Submarines only
     Send / Receive
                                                                 No
     Lend-lease
     Use if Damaged                                      Useless if damaged
     Maximum Damage                      3                      3                         3
     Cost to Repair                                   1 IPP per damage point



     13.2.3 Ports:
     There are two types of ports: Minor Ports and Major Ports:

     • Use: You can use it if you have possessed it since the beginning of your Player Turn or if
       you are Aligned with the nation that Possesses it.
     • Anti-aircraft: Both have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery that defend against strategic bombing.
       They do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery while being constructed or when having
       su ered maximum damage.
     • Movement Bonus: A Supply Path is required. Having multiple ports do not provide a
       cumulative movement bonus.
     • Strategic Naval Movement: A Supply Path is required.

                                              Minor Ports                      Major Ports
     Price                                           3                              3/3
     Upgrade                                 To Major Port: 4                      N/A
                                       On the border between any possessed land zone and one
     Where                                                or two sea zones

     Movement Bonus                                 No                       Surface Ships +1

     Scramble                                       No                   Up to 3 Surface Ships
     Scramble with Radar                            No                  Unlimited Surface Ships
     Able to be in port                             No                       Surface Ships only

     Strategic Naval Movement                       N/A                              4
     Range
     Supply Path Range                               2                               4
     Use if Damaged                                          Useless if damaged


                                                                                                     94
ff
                                          Minor Ports                    Major Ports
Maximum Damage                                  1                              3
Cost to Repair                                       1 IPP per damage point



13.2.4 Dockyards:
There are two types of Dockyards: Minor Dockyards and Major Dockyards.

• Use: You can use it if you have possessed it since the beginning of your Player Turn or if
  you are Aligned with the nation that Possesses it.
• Anti-aircraft: Both have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery that defend against strategic bombing.
  Never eliminated or taken as casualties. They do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery
  while being constructed or when having su ered maximum damage.
• Movement Bonus: A Supply Path is required. Having multiple dockyards do not provide a
  cumulative movement bonus.
• Strategic Naval Movement: A Supply Path is required.

                                      Minor Dockyards                Major Dockyards
Price                                          2/2                            4/4
Upgrade                              To Major Dockyard: 5                N/A
                                   On the border between any On the border between any
Where                               possessed land zone and possessed land zone in Home
                                      one or two sea zones   Country and one or two sea
                                                                        zones
Repair Slots                           1 hit per Player Turn    5 hits per Player Turn

Repair Slots with                    2 hits per Player Turn          8 hits per Player Turn
Improved Factories

Movement Bonus                                 No                      Surface Ships +1

Scramble                                       No                   Up to 3 Surface Ships
Scramble with Radar                            No                  Unlimited Surface Ships
Able to be in port                             No                     Surface Ships only

Strategic Naval Movement                      N/A                              4
Range
Supply Path Range                               2                              4
Use if Damaged                                        Useless if damaged
Maximum Damage                                  2                              4
Cost to Repair                                       1 IPP per damage point

A Dockyard outside Home Country requires a Supply Path. If this Supply Path is absent,
blockaded or interdicted, the dockyard cannot repair. The Player Turn a dockyard is upgraded
or repaired its production is limited to the production capacity it had at the start of the Player
Turn.




                                                                                                95
                              ff
     13.2.5 Shipyards:
     There are two types of shipyards: Minor Shipyards and Major Shipyards.

     • Use: You can use it if you have possessed it since the beginning of your Player Turn. If you
       are Aligned with the nation that Possesses it, you can only use it for movement bonus, in
       port, repairs and scrambling.
     • Anti-aircraft: Both have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery that defend against strategic bombing.
       Never eliminated nor taken as casualties. They do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery
       while being constructed or when having su ered maximum damage.
     • Movement Bonus: A Supply Path is required. Having multiple shipyards do not provide a
       cumulative movement bonus.
     • Strategic Naval Movement: A Supply Path is required.

                                            Minor Shipyards                Major Shipyards
     Price                                          3/3                              5/5
     Upgrade                               To Major Shipyard: 5                  N/A
                                        On the border between any     On the border between any
                                         possessed land zone and       possessed land zone in
     Where                                                            Home Country and one or
                                           one or two sea zones
                                                                            two sea zones
     Production / Repair Slots               1 per Player Turn             5 per Player Turn

     Production / Repair Slots,              2 per Player Turn              8 per Player Turn
     Improved Factories
     Produce Capital Ships                          No                               Yes

     Movement Bonus                                 No                      Surface Ships +1

     Scramble                                       No                   Up to 3 Surface Ships
     Scramble with Radar                            No                  Unlimited Surface Ships
     Able to be in port                             No                     Surface Ships only

     Strategic Naval Movement                      N/A                               4
     Range
     Supply Path Range                               2                               4
     Use if Damaged                                        Useless if damaged
     Maximum Damage                                  3                               5
     Cost to Repair                                       1 IPP per damage point

     A Shipyard outside Home Country requires a Supply Path. If this Supply Path is absent,
     blockaded or interdicted, the shipyard cannot produce or repair until restored. The Player Turn
     a shipyard is upgraded or repaired its production is limited to the production capacity it had at
     the start of the Player Turn.


     13.2.6 Forti cations:
     A Forti cation represents major defensive works established to prevent invasion. Forti cations
     are placed on a border of a land zone and protect from attacks across that border by Enemy
     units including border clashes (refer to 10.5.2), amphibious assaults (refer to 10.8), as well as
     airborne assaults (refer to 10.6.1).

                                                                                                    96
fi




      fi




                                   ff




                                                                                fi
                                                                                                 Fortifications
                         Price                                                                         5/5
                                                             Border of any possessed land zone.
                                                             Only 1 Forti cation per border may be built. The limit of 1 per per
                         Where                               border also includes Forti cations from completing strategic
                                                             objectives.

                         Forti cations defend on the rst round of combat at “5” with two rst strike rolls except in
                         airborne assaults where the Attacker has developed Airborne Doctrine technology. They add
                         +2 defense bonus to all infantry-class units in the zone on the rst round of combat.

                         Forti cations reduce these die rolls by 1:
                         • Shore bombardment
                         • Attrition attacks
                         • Carpet bombing in cities
                         Example: A Battleship that normally scores a shore bombardment hit on 1-4, is reduced to
                         scoring a hit on 1-3.

                         Forti cations are removed if the zone is captured. Forti cations may neither be strategically
                         bombed nor selected as a casualty.

                         Land units cannot blitz into a land zone border that contains an Enemy Forti cation.

                         If attacking a land zone across multiple borders, with one of them having a Forti cation, hits
                         attributable to the Forti cation must be taken from units that are attacking across its border.
                         Such hits would include the two forti cation rst strikes and any hits speci cally due to
                         modi cation to rolls caused by the Forti cation.

                         Example: USSR attacks Central Romania from Bulgaria and Bessarabia. Germany has a
                         Forti cation on the Central Romanian border towards Bessarabia. The German player gets one
                         hit on the Forti cation’s two rst strike rolls. German Mountain Infantry also get a hit on a “6” in
                         the rst combat round. Both of these hits must be taken from attacking Soviet units coming
                         from Bessarabia. Had the Mountain Infantry got a hit on a “5” instead, the Soviet player could
                         freely choose a casualty.

                         France has a special Forti cation - the “Maginot Line” - in Alsace-Lorraine on the border
                         towards Bavaria. It protects from attacks by Enemy land units across that border. It defends
                         on the rst round of combat at “6” with two rst strike rolls. It adds +3 defense bonus to all
                         infantry-class units in the zone on the rst round of combat. All attacking land units su er
                         double casualties on all combat rounds.


                         13.2.7 Coastal Artillery:
                         Coastal Artillery represents artillery emplacements along a land/sea zone border to defend
                         against amphibious assaults.

                                                                                                 Coastal Artillery
                         Price                                                                          6
                                                                       Any possessed land zone bordering one or more sea zones.
                         Where                                         Multiple Coastal Artillery may be built on the same border.



                                                                                                                                     97
fi




     fi
     fi
     fi
     fi




          fi




               fi




                    fi




                          fi




                                   fi




                                        fi




                                             fi




                                                  fi




                                                   fi




                                                        fi




                                                             fi




                                                                  fi




                                                                          fi




                                                                               fi




                                                                                     fi




                                                                                            fi




                                                                                                  fi




                                                                                                             fi




                                                                                                                  fi




                                                                                                                       fi




                                                                                                                            ff
Each Coastal Artillery gets one rst strike defense roll at “3” per attacking ship shore
bombarding and/or unloading units in the amphibious assault up to a maximum of three shots.
The amphibiously assaulting player chooses casualties.

Coastal Artillery located at narrow crossings may re at each Enemy Surface Ship at “3” that
passes through the narrow crossing (up to a maximum of three shots per Player Turn). This
also includes when scrambling out of a Naval Facility (refer to 10.4) or going in port (refer to
11.5).

Example: Great Britain scrambles a Destroyer out of the Major Shipyard in London into sea
zone A23. Germany Possesses a Coastal Artillery in Picardy. As the British Destroyer crosses
the narrow crossing line, the Coastal Artillery gets to re.

Coastal Artillery only ever get to re up to three shots per Player Turn.

Example: Japan and the Commonwealth are at war. Japan moves a Heavy Cruiser and two
Naval Transports from I12 to P50 and then amphibiously assaults British Malaya. The British
Coastal Artillery only gets to re three shots.

Coastal artillery is removed if the zone is captured. They may neither be strategically bombed
nor selected as a casualty.


13.2.8 Railroads:
Railroads are placed on land zone borders. If a land zone has a border with a crossing railroad,
the entire zone is considered to be “covered” with rail.

• Use: You can use it if you have possessed it since the beginning of your Player Turn or if
  you are Aligned to the nation that Possesses it.
• Anti-aircraft: Railroads do not have inherent Anti-aircraft Artillery.
Railroads can be strategically bombed (refer to 10.6.2). If USSR is using its “Scorched Earth”
special ability to destroy railroads, this is being done on borders between land zones.

                                Normal Terrain        Desert/Jungle/Marsh/Mountain/Tundra
Price                                      2                                   4
                               Border of any possessed land zone (except into impassable
                               terrain). If you want to build a railroad on a border towards another
Where                          nation, you have to get permission from the corresponding player
                               to do so. Non-controlled neutral nations do not allow railroads to
                               be built into their land zones.
Use if Damaged                                         Useless if damaged
Maximum Damage                          1                                   2
Cost to Repair                                        1 IPP per damage point

When building new railroads, the land zone determines which type of gauge (narrow or broad)
being built:

Land Zones                                                             Gauge Type
Brazil, Spain, Finland, Mongolia, Tannu Tuva & USSR                    Broad
Rest of the world                                                      Narrow (normal)



                                                                                                       98
                fi




                     fi




                          fi




                                            fi




                                                 fi
Determine the terrain by tracing the most direct line from the originating land zone roundel to
the target land zone roundel. The terrain on the border determines the type of terrain, and thus
the price.

Example: the border of Sudan and Belgian Congo is normal and jungle terrain, so the cost is 4
IPP.

A new railroad is placed on one land zone border, and connects these two land zones via rail.




                                                                                             99
                  Chapter 14 - Historical Events

14.1 Spanish Civil War

Spanish Civil War
Forces              Spanish Nationalists controlled by Germany versus
                    Spanish Republicans controlled by USSR.
Participation       Spanish factions are controlled Minor Powers. They can only move/
                    attack within Spain and in sea zones adjacent to Spanish
                    Nationalist or Spanish Republican Originally possessed land zones.
                    As long as the civil war is on-going, no foreign nations may
                    intervene/attack Spanish units or land zones. Eligible nations may
                    send Lend-lease.
Axis Support        Germany and Italy may both send Lend-lease to the Nationalists.
                    Germany may create the Condor Legion (refer to 15.1).

Comintern Support USSR may send Lend-lease to the Republicans.
Allies’ Support     The Allies may send Militia upgrades as Lend-lease to both
                    factions. Only one Allies’ Major Power may send Lend-lease per
                    Calendar Turn.
Income              Republicans and Nationalists neither collect nor spend income, but
                    make recruitment rolls (refer to 12.7). Note that both factions use all
                    land zones for recruitment roll purposes.

Victory &           Ends when one faction Possesses all 6 continental Spanish land
                    zones. Upon resolution of the Spanish Civil War, the vanquished
Resolution
                    faction ceases to exist and the victor becomes neutral (refer to
                    4.10).
Aftermath           Remove any remaining units from the defeated faction and repair
                    any damage to Spanish facilities.




14.2 Italian Campaign in Abyssinia:

Italian Campaign in Abyssinia
Forces            Italy versus Abyssinia controlled by France.
Participation     Italy and Abyssinia ght using normal rules. Abyssinia may only
                  attack Italy in Eritrea. Other nations may not intervene without a
                  DoW. Both sides begin at war (no income increases are triggered).
                  Eligible nations may send Lend-lease (refer to 8.7).
Income &          Abyssinia neither collects nor spends income. Instead, it makes a
                  recruitment roll (refer to 12.7).
Production
Victory           Italy wins if it Possesses Abyssinia.

                  Abyssinia wins if it Possesses Eritrea. If Abyssinia wins, Abyssinia
                  Aligns with France as soon as France is at war with a Major Power. If
                  France is subsequently defeated Abyssinia becomes Free French. If
                  Abyssinia wins after France has surrendered, Abyssinia does not
                  Align, but stays a controlled Minor Power.


                                                                                         100
    fi
Italian Campaign in Abyssinia
Duration              After Abyssinia or Italy achieve victory, Italy and France (or Free
                      France) may continue to attack each other in Abyssinia and Eritrea
                      without a declaration of war for the rest of the game.


14.3 Chinese Civil War

Chinese Civil War
Factions              Nationalist (KMT) versus Communist (CCP).
Participation         CCP and KMT ght using normal rules. Other nations may not enter
                      any Originally possessed KMT, CCP, or warlord land zones without a
                      DoW, even if that land zone is Friendly. (Exception: Dadao
                      Government, refer to 15.4).
                      Eligible nations may send Lend-lease (refer to 8.7, 15.3 and 15.4).
Truce                 When a foreign Major Power declares war on China, CCP and KMT
                      may agree to a truce (refer to 6.6).

Duration              Ends when one faction no longer has any surviving units.



14.3.1 Evolution to Major Power:
Until evolved, CCP and KMT do not Align with anyone. They can only move/attack within
Chinese Home Country and in sea zones adjacent to Chinese Home Country.

Evolution to Major Power:
CCP and KMT evolve to a Major Power if their land zone IPP values add to 13+ IPP. After
evolving, they select a Capital and may place 1 factory there at no cost:

• 1 Major Factory if chosen Capital is a city land zone.
• 1 Medium Factory if chosen Capital is any other land zone.
Subsequently, they can build facilities, send Lend-lease, develop technology and move/attack
outside Chinese Home Country.

As a Major Power, CCP neither gets recruitments nor in uence rolls. In addition, it no longer
has the “Decentralized Production” special ability (refer to 15.2). As a Major Power, KMT no
longer has “Decentralized Production” or “Low Morale” special abilities (refer to 15.7).

Note that if CCP or KMT evolve to a Major Power in their respective Player Turns, they can still
use their “Decentralized Production” special ability in that turn.




                                                                                            101
 fi




                                          fl
                            Chapter 15 - National Special Abilities

          Each nation has some special abilities unique to that nation. Special abilities supersede
          normal rules when in con ict (i.e. “Decentralized Production”).

          15.1 Germany

                                                 Special Abilities
          Condor Legion                 Germany has +1 Supply Path range when delivering Lend-lease
                                        to the Spanish Nationalists as well as when transferring the
                                        Condor Legion to and from Spain.

                                        Once per game, while the Spanish Civil War is ongoing, the
                                        Condor Legion can be created in the Production Phase by
                                        moving a German Fighter in a Supply Path already on the board
                                        to the place units box. Cost to implement: 5 IPP.

                                        During the Place Units Phase, the Condor Legion is transferred
                                        to a Spanish Nationalist-possessed land zone via a Supply
                                        Path. This transfer does not require strategic rail or Strategic
                                        Naval Movement. Subject to interdiction (refer to 12.5). The
                                        Spanish Republicans get an extra recruitment roll on the next
                                        Spanish Republican Player Turn the Condor Legion is created.

                                        While in Spain, the Condor Legion is a Spanish Nationalist unit.

                                        The Condor Legion can be recalled back to German Home
                                        Country at no cost during the Non-combat Movement Phase if
                                        the Spanish Nationalists win the Spanish Civil War. Requires a
                                        Supply Path. Subject to interdiction (refer to 12.5).
          Blitzkrieg                    Once per game, and prior to July, 1941, all German land and air
                                        units may make an additional sequence of combat movement,
                                        combat (including blitz) and non-combat movement. The
                                        second sequence of attacks takes place immediately after the
                                        end of the rst non-combat movement. All participating land
                                        and air units have their movement allowance reset after the rst
                                        sequence. In the second sequence, land units may not combat
                                        move or non-combat move through just captured land zones.
                                        Units with blitz may use this ability both sequences if possible.
                                        Attacking vehicle-class units do not su er -2 attack penalty
                                        when attacking cities. On the turn Blitzkrieg is used, Strategic
                                        Rail Movement only occurs during the second sequence of
                                        non-combat movement.

                                        Example: Germany attacks Belgium and blitzes into Picardy in
                                        the rst sequence. In the second sequence, the German player
                                        wants to attack Paris. Units in Belgium with a movement of “2”
                                        are not able to participate.
          Technological                 Can purchase Medium Armor, Mechanized Infantry, Strategic
                                        Bombers and Tank Destroyers earlier than other nations,
          Superiority
                                        beginning July, 1938.




                                                                                                        102
fi




     fi




                       fl




                                   ff




                                                          fi
                                      Special Abilities
     Operation Barbarossa Once per game, if Germany declares war on USSR, in the
                             subsequent German Combat Phase, all German land and air
                             units get +1 attack against Soviet units and all Soviet units get
                             -1 defense on all rounds of combat and subsequent blitzes.
                             USSR may not attack more than one German-possessed land
                             zone on its next Player Turn following this combat phase.
                             (Note: Germany can not use this special ability if USSR
                             declares war rst).
     Deutsches Afrika        Prerequisite: Italy is at war with an Allies’ Major Power.
     Korps (DAK)
                             Once per game, DAK can be created in the Production Phase
                             by moving German units in a Supply Path and already on the
                             board to the place units box. DAK may consist of up to 3
                             Infantry, up to 1 Motorized Infantry, up to 2 artillery-class units
                             and up to 2 Light Armor (or 1 Light and 1 Medium). Cost to
                             implement: 1 IPP per unit, maximum of 5 IPP regardless of the
                             number of DAK units created.

                             At the end of the Place Units Phase, DAK units are transferred
                             to a Friendly Originally Italian-possessed North African land
                             zone via a Supply Path. This transfer does not require strategic
                             rail or Strategic Naval Movement. Normal Supply Path rules
                             apply (refer to 1.11). Note each DAK unit is a separate delivery.
                             DAK units are una ected by desert terrain rules.

                             If a DAK unit is eliminated, the German player may in
                             subsequent Production Phases send a replacement of the
                             same type. Cost per unit: 1 IPP. Same transfer rules apply.

                             DAK units can be recalled back to German Home Country at no
                             cost during the Non-combat Movement Phase. Requires a
                             Supply Path. Subject to interdiction (refer to 12.5).



15.2 CCP

                                      Special Abilities
     Decentralized           CCP may place infantry-class units and Cavalry in any Chinese
                             Home Country land zone it has possessed since the beginning
     Production
                             of the Player Turn. No factory is required.
     Recruitment             During the Place Units Phase, CCP may make one recruitment
                             roll. If the roll is less than or equal to the total number of land
                             zones CCP Possesses, CCP may place one Infantry or two
                             Militia in any of those land zones (according to the rules for
                             “Decentralized Production,” above).
     Comintern Brothers      If there is an undamaged railroad connecting a CCP-possessed
                             land zone to a Soviet-possessed land zone in the Production
                             Phase, it may purchase Artillery and Anti-aircraft Artillery units.
                             These must be placed in the land zone with this railroad.




                                                                                                   103
fi




        ff
                                                             Special Abilities
               Spreading Influence                  During the Place Units Phase, CCP may make one in uence roll
                                                    on a Chinese warlord adjacent to an In uencing Zone. If the roll
                                                    is less than or equal to the total number of adjacent land zones
                                                    CCP Possesses, all remaining land zones and military units of
                                                    that warlord Align with CCP. Prior to rolling, CCP may spend
                                                    IPP up to the amount of its original in uence roll to increase the
                                                    chance of success. Each IPP spent subtracts 1 from the
                                                    in uence roll. Regardless of how much is spent, the In uence
                                                    attempt back res on a “12” causing the warlord to Align with
                                                    KMT instead.



          15.3 USSR

                                                             Special Abilities
               Inefficiency                         Aligned/captured land zones do not increase Soviet income
                                                    until USSR reaches its Full Production income via income
                                                    increase rolls or from an Enemy declaring war on USSR. Note
                                                    that income from Annexed land zones can be collected
                                                    immediately.
               Factory Movement                     Once at war with a Major Power, USSR may use 1 Strategic
                                                    Rail Move to move a Minor or Medium Factory and 2 Strategic
                                                    Rail Moves to move a Major Factory within Soviet Home
                                                    Country. The factory cannot produce any units or technology,
                                                    or be upgraded or repaired the Player Turn it moves. It moves
                                                    in whatever state of damage it has su ered.

                                                    If USSR has achieved its “Access to the Mediterranean”
                                                    strategic objective, it can move one Minor Factory each Player
                                                    Turn without the Home Country restriction and ignoring
                                                    Railroad gauge changes.
               Northern Sea Route                   USSR can move one naval unit per Player Turn between sea
                                                    zones A9 and P1 (in either direction). The unit must start its
                                                    move in either sea zone A9 or P1, and it expends its full
                                                    movement (including any bonuses) to make the move. USSR
                                                    may give other nations permission to use this route.
               For the Motherland!                  In the rst Production Phase that USSR is at war with a Major
                                                    Power all units cost -1 IPP.

                                                    USSR may use its Militia for attacking in its Home Country
                                                    paired 1:1 with other land units.
               Scorched Earth                       USSR can destroy its own facilities during the Combat Phase
                                                    of its Player Turn. Land zone must have been in the Soviet
                                                    player’s Possession since the beginning of the Player Turn. No
                                                    land unit is required. Destroyed facilities cannot be repaired.




                                                                                                                      104
fl




     fi




          fi




                                     fl




                                          ff




                                               fl




                                                               fl




                                                                    fl
                                               Special Abilities
          International Red Aid   CCP:
                                  During the Place Units Phase, one Soviet air transport in a
                                  Supply Path which has not moved or been placed this turn may
                                  Lend-lease deliver a Militia upgrade to CCP. The air transport
                                  uses its range to travel to the recipient-possessed land zone,
                                  may y over Warlord-possessed land zones, and must land in a
                                  Soviet-possessed land zone after delivery.

                                  Spanish Republicans:
                                  If Turkey is a Non-controlled neutral nation, USSR may trace a
                                  Supply Path to deliver Lend-lease to the Spanish Republicans
                                  through the Turkish Straits even if USSR is at war with a Major
                                  Power.




          15.4 Japan

                                               Special Abilities
          Dadao Government        During the Place Units Phase, Japan may make one in uence
                                  roll on a Chinese warlord adjacent to an In uencing Zone. If the
                                  roll is less than or equal to the total number of adjacent land
                                  zones Japan Controls/Possesses, all remaining land zones and
                                  military units of that warlord Align and become/join a
                                  Japanese-controlled Axis Minor Power: Dadao Government.
                                  Note that impassable borders do not count for adjacency. Prior
                                  to rolling, Japan may spend IPP up to the amount of its original
                                  in uence roll to increase the chance of success. Each IPP
                                  spent subtracts 1 from the in uence roll. Regardless of how
                                  much is spent, the In uence attempt back res on a “12”
                                  causing the warlord to Align with KMT instead.

                                  As long as controlled, the Dadao Government gets recruitment
                                  rolls, and may receive Lend-lease from Japan. It may attack
                                  Chinese land zones without the rest of China Aligning with CCP
                                  or KMT.

                                  If attacked by CCP or KMT, it does not Align with Japan. If
                                  Japan is at war with both China and a Major Power, Dadao
                                  Aligns with Japan.
          Kamikaze                When USA reaches Wartime Income, Japan may make up to 2
                                  kamikaze attacks per Calendar Turn to a game total of 6. These
                                  are made at an attack of 7 vs. Surface Ships with rst strike
                                  and Target Selection of “1-3”. No aircraft is required or
                                  expended for these attacks. Kamikaze attacks may be made
                                  from Japanese Home Country and have a range of 4 sea
                                  zones. These sea zones are depicted with a small “Kamikaze”
                                  symbol on the map. Kamikazes may not be used in port
                                  attacks.

                                  Kamikazes may also be used when Japan is the Defender in a
                                  sea zone adjacent to Japanese Home Country or during the
                                  shore bombardment phase of an amphibious assault on
                                  Japanese Home Country.


                                                                                                    105
fl




     fl




                fl




                       fl




                                  fi




                                  fl




                                          fi




                                                  fl
                                     Special Abilities
     Surprise Attack        Japan may, as a DoW, make one surprise attack on one land or
                            sea zone (or one sea zone subsequently followed by an
                            amphibious assault on an adjacent land zone, with “Surprise
                            Attack” for both) the rst time it declares war on an Allies’
                            Major Power. In this zone, all Japanese aircraft gain rst strike.
                            All Enemy units receive a -1 defense on the rst round of
                            combat. Scrambling is not allowed into combat subject to a
                            surprise attack (refer to 10.4). If the surprise attack is used on a
                            port attack (refer to 10.6.4), the inherent facility Anti-aircraft
                            Artillery does not get to defend. If the surprise attack is used to
                            attack a city land zone, combat is not limited to three rounds of
                            combat.
                            Japanese ships and aircraft on Carriers gain +1 combat
                            movement bonus to reach this zone. This movement bonus is
                            cumulative with other movement bonuses.
                            Example: A ship with a movement of 3 adjacent to a Major Port,
                            will have a total movement of 5.
     Destroyer Transports   May transport Marines on its Destroyers, one per ship. These
                            may amphibiously assault from the Destroyer. While
                            transporting Marines, Destroyers have -1 movement. May not
                            continue moving after unloading.
     Dug in Defense         Japanese infantry-class units defending in their Home Country
                            gain +1 defense bonus.



     15.5 Great Britain

                                     Special Abilities
     Operation Catapult     Great Britain may carry out port attacks on Vichy ships in port
                            (refer to 10.6.4) without a declaration of war (e.g. Vichy does not
                            Align with Germany).
     Call to Arms           In the rst Production Phase after the British Commonwealth is
                            at war with an Axis Major Power, Great Britain may, at no cost,
                            place two Militia in its Home Country and two Colonial Infantry
                            in eligible land zones.

                            In addition, Great Britain can move two of the following three
                            technologies up one stage: Anti-submarine Warfare, Long-
                            range Aircraft or Heavy Strategic Bombers.
     Canadian Industrial    Great Britain may receive Lend-lease from USA in Canada.
     Capacity               Great Britain may build Major Dockyards and Major Shipyards
                            as well as Medium and Major Factories in Canada.



     15.6 France

                                     Special Abilities
     Demilitarized Border   France may not build a Forti cation on the border with Belgium
                            as long as Belgium is neutral.




                                                                                               106
fi




          fi




                fi




                              fi




                                       fi
                             Special Abilities
Slow Mobilization   French land units cannot attack into German or Italian Home
                    Country until it has been at war for one Player Turn (i.e. it has
                    started and ended the Player Turn at war). Exception: Border
                    clashes (refer to 10.5.2).



15.7 KMT

                             Special Abilities
Decentralized       KMT may place infantry-class units and Cavalry in any Chinese
                    Home Country land zone it has possessed since the beginning
Production
                    of the Player Turn. No factory is required.
Low Morale          Upon attacking, each KMT regular Infantry and Cavalry that
                    rolls a 10 or more retreats from the attack to the zone it
                    attacked from. These units must roll dice, even if there are no
                    defending units in the land zone they are attacking. Units that
                    are forced to retreat may not be taken as casualties.

                    If KMT has evolved to a Major Power, it no longer su ers this
                    attack weakness.
Burma and Ledo      Allows tracing a Supply Path through the otherwise impassable
                    Himalayan Mountains for Lend-lease delivery. It cannot be
Roads
                    strategically bombed. It requires the following four conditions in
                    order to be open:

                    1. It must be July, 1938 or later.
                    2. Japan and KMT are at war.
                    3. KMT Possesses Yunnan.
                    4. The Allies Possess Burma.

                    While the Burma Road is open, KMT may purchase Artillery and
                    Anti-aircraft Artillery in Yunnan.

                    The Ledo Road extends the Burma Road to Bengal. Same
                    conditions and rules apply, but the Allies must also Possess
                    Bengal.



15.8 USA

                             Special Abilities
I Want You!         Once at war with a Major Power, infantry-class units cost -1
                    IPP in the next USA Production Phase.
Contain Communism   USA may, at any income level, send Lend-lease to KMT, if CCP
                    has received Lend-lease from USSR during that Calendar Turn.
                    (Exception: When USSR uses its “International Red Aid” special
                    ability.)

                    USA may use FEC-, French-, or Free French-possessed
                    facilities to deliver this Lend-lease.




                                                                                        107
                               ff
                                      Special Abilities
Monroe Doctrine              The “Monroe Doctrine” allows USA to attack Comintern units
                             that are bordering North or South American land zones
                             regardless of its own income level without declaring war. USA
                             is also allowed to attack Comintern-occupied land zones in
                             North and South America. Comintern violations of the “Monroe
                             Doctrine” do not trigger USA income increases.

                             If an Axis Major Power attacks a land zone in North or South
                             America, or has a Surface Ship ends its movement within 3 sea
                             zones of USA Home Country, USA considers it a declaration of
                             war. Sea zones a ected by this are depicted by a small
                             “Monroe” symbol on the map.
Operation Overlord           Once per game, in January, 1943 or later, USA units and British
                             Commonwealth units may together amphibiously attack a
                             German-possessed land zone bordering an Atlantic Ocean
                             (A##) sea zone during the USA player’s turn. Both nations may
                             use one another’s naval and air transports. Aircraft and airborne
                             assaulting units may participate in the attack. Eligible warships
                             may provide shore bombardment. The participating British
                             Commonwealth units may not have moved or been placed
                             during the British Commonwealth player's turn. USA takes
                             possession of the captured land zone.




                       Chapter 16 - Designer Notes

Realism vs. Playability:
Global War is meant to be a fun, balanced game that takes players back to the years before
the Second World War. As such, you will notice many elements of history that have been
changed to be ahistorical for the sake of improving playability.

Balance:
Balance is paramount for a game like Global War. We have put a lot of emphasis into ne-
tuning the balance of each component, striving to holistically improving the game overall.

Time is an important element. Early-to-mid game, the Axis should be overwhelmingly strong.
Mid-to-late game the balance will start to shift towards an Allies’ victory. Comintern, as the 3rd
alliance, is the joker in the mix. They have equal possibility to win as the other two alliances.
The new variable ending die roll ensures excitement to the very last minute and eliminates
late-game player gimmicks to earn victory points.

Longevity:
The changes that were made in version 4 help ensure Global War will continue to be fun to
play for many years to come. Testing has shown that players continue to evolve their
strategies even after playing dozens of games. As soon as a “winning strategy” emerges,
players will quickly be able to adapt with counter strategies.

Building a close-knit gaming group of dedicated people is the dream of many players.
Historical Board Gaming hopes that the many improvements that were made for version 4 will
grow the community of players and enable more people to realize this dream in the future.




                                                                                              108
   ff




                                                                          fi
